ACT ISCENE I. London. The palace.Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and othersSo shaken as we are, so wan with care,Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,And breathe short-winded accents of new broilsTo be commenced in strands afar remote.No more the thirsty entrance of this soilShall daub her lips with her own children's blood,Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofsOf hostile paces: those opposed eyes,Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,All of one nature, of one substance bred,Did lately meet in the intestine shockAnd furious close of civil butcheryShall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,March all one way and be no more opposedAgainst acquaintance, kindred and allies:The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,Whose soldier now, under whose blessed crossWe are impressed and engaged to fight,Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' wombTo chase these pagans in those holy fieldsOver whose acres walk'd those blessed feetWhich fourteen hundred years ago were nail'dFor our advantage on the bitter cross.But this our purpose now is twelve month old,And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go:Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hearOf you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,What yesternight our council did decreeIn forwarding this dear expedience.My liege, this haste was hot in question,And many limits of the charge set downBut yesternight: when all athwart there cameA post from Wales loaden with heavy news,Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer,Leading the men of Herefordshire to fightAgainst the irregular and wild Glendower,Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,A thousand of his people butchered,Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,Such beastly shameless transformation,By those Welshwomen done as may not beWithout much shame retold or spoken of.It seems then that the tidings of this broilBrake off our business for the Holy Land.This match'd with other did, my gracious lord,For more uneven and unwelcome newsCame from the north and thus it did import:On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald,That ever-valiant and approved Scot,At Holmedon met,Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,As by discharge of their artillery,And shape of likelihood, the news was told,For he that brought them, in the very heatAnd pride of their contention did take horse,Uncertain of the issue any way.Here is a dear, a true industrious friend,Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.Stain'd with the variation of each soilBetwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours,And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter seeOn Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur tookMordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest sonTo beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith:And is not this an honourable spoil?A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?In faith,It is a conquest for a prince to boast of.Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sinIn envy that my Lord NorthumberlandShould be the father to so blest a son,A son who is the theme of honour's tongue,Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant,Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride:Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,See riot and dishonour stain the browOf my young Harry. O that it could be provedThat some night-tripping fairy had exchangedIn cradle-clothes our children where they lay,And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners,Which he in this adventure hath surprised,To his own use he keeps, and sends me word,I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.This is his uncle's teaching, this is Worcester,Malevolent to you in all aspects,Which makes him prune himself, and bristle upThe crest of youth against your dignity.But I have sent for him to answer this,And for this cause awhile we must neglectOur holy purpose to Jerusalem.Cousin, on Wednesday next our council weWill hold at Windsor, so inform the lords:But come yourself with speed to us again,For more is to be said and to be doneThan out of anger can be uttered.I will, my liege.ExeuntSCENE II. London. An apartment of the Prince's.Enter the PRINCE OF WALES and FALSTAFFNow, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sackand unbuttoning thee after supper and sleeping uponbenches after noon, that thou hast forgotten todemand that truly which thou wouldst truly know.What a devil hast thou to do with the time of theday? Unless hours were cups of sack and minutescapons and clocks the tongues of bawds and dials thesigns of leaping-houses and the blessed sun himselfa fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see noreason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demandthe time of the day.Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, for we that takepurses go by the moon and the seven stars, and notby Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' And,I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as, Godsave thy grace,--majesty I should say, for gracethou wilt have none,--What, none?No, by my troth, not so much as will serve toprologue to an egg and butter.Well, how then? come, roundly, roundly.Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let notus that are squires of the night's body be calledthieves of the day's beauty: let us be Diana'sforesters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of themoon, and let men say we be men of good government,being governed, as the sea is, by our noble andchaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.Thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for thefortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb andflow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is,by the moon. As, for proof, now: a purse of goldmost resolutely snatched on Monday night and mostdissolutely spent on Tuesday morning, got withswearing 'Lay by' and spent with crying 'Bring in,'now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladderand by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.By the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not myhostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. Andis not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?How now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips andthy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with abuff jerkin?Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many atime and oft.Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?No, I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch,and where it would not, I have used my credit.Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparentthat thou art heir apparent--But, I prithee, sweetwag, shall there be gallows standing in England whenthou art king? and resolution thus fobbed as it iswith the rusty curb of old father antic the law? Donot thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.No, thou shalt.Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt havethe hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.Well, Hal, well, and in some sort it jumps with myhumour as well as waiting in the court, I can tellyou.For obtaining of suits?Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangmanhath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as melancholyas a gib cat or a lugged bear.Or an old lion, or a lover's lute.Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy ofMoor-ditch?Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeedthe most comparative, rascalliest, sweet youngprince. But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no morewith vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where acommodity of good names were to be bought. An oldlord of the council rated me the other day in thestreet about you, sir, but I marked him not, and yethe talked very wisely, but I regarded him not, andyet he talked wisely, and in the street too.Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in thestreets, and no man regards it.O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed ableto corrupt a saint. Thou hast done much harm uponme, Hal, God forgive thee for it! Before I knewthee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now am I, if a manshould speak truly, little better than one of thewicked. I must give over this life, and I will giveit over: by the Lord, and I do not, I am a villain:I'll be damned for never a king's son inChristendom.Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad, I'll make one, an Ido not, call me villain and baffle me.I see a good amendment of life in thee, from prayingto purse-taking.Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal, 'tis no sin for aman to labour in his vocation.Enter POINSPoins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set amatch. O, if men were to be saved by merit, whathole in hell were hot enough for him? This is themost omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' toa true man.Good morrow, Ned.Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse?what says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack! howagrees the devil and thee about thy soul, that thousoldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeiraand a cold capon's leg?Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall havehis bargain, for he was never yet a breaker ofproverbs: he will give the devil his due.Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.But, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by fouro'clock, early at Gadshill! there are pilgrims goingto Canterbury with rich offerings, and tradersriding to London with fat purses: I have vizardsfor you all, you have horses for yourselves:Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespokesupper to-morrow night in Eastcheap: we may do itas secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuffyour purses full of crowns, if you will not, tarryat home and be hanged.Hear ye, Yedward, if I tarry at home and go not,I'll hang you for going.You will, chops?Hal, wilt thou make one?Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.There's neither honesty, manhood, nor goodfellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the bloodroyal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.Why, that's well said.Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.I care not.Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone:I will lay him down such reasons for this adventurethat he shall go.Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and himthe ears of profiting, that what thou speakest maymove and what he hears may be believed, that thetrue prince may, for recreation sake, prove a falsethief, for the poor abuses of the time wantcountenance. Farewell: you shall find me in Eastcheap.Farewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!Exit FalstaffNow, my good sweet honey lord, ride with usto-morrow: I have a jest to execute that I cannotmanage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshillshall rob those men that we have already waylaid:yourself and I will not be there, and when theyhave the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cutthis head off from my shoulders.How shall we part with them in setting forth?Why, we will set forth before or after them, andappoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is atour pleasure to fail, and then will they adventureupon the exploit themselves, which they shall haveno sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by ourhorses, by our habits and by every otherappointment, to be ourselves.Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie themin the wood, our vizards we will change after weleave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckramfor the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.Well, for two of them, I know them to be astrue-bred cowards as ever turned back, and for thethird, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'llforswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be, theincomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue willtell us when we meet at supper: how thirty, atleast, he fought with, what wards, what blows, whatextremities he endured, and in the reproof of thislies the jest.Well, I'll go with thee: provide us all thingsnecessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap,there I'll sup. Farewell.Farewell, my lord.Exit PoinsI know you all, and will awhile upholdThe unyoked humour of your idleness:Yet herein will I imitate the sun,Who doth permit the base contagious cloudsTo smother up his beauty from the world,That, when he please again to be himself,Being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at,By breaking through the foul and ugly mistsOf vapours that did seem to strangle him.If all the year were playing holidays,To sport would be as tedious as to work,But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.So, when this loose behavior I throw offAnd pay the debt I never promised,By how much better than my word I am,By so much shall I falsify men's hopes,And like bright metal on a sullen ground,My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,Shall show more goodly and attract more eyesThan that which hath no foil to set it off.I'll so offend, to make offence a skill,Redeeming time when men think least I will.ExitSCENE III. London. The palace.Enter the KING, NORTHUMBERLAND, WORCESTER, HOTSPUR, SIR WALTER BLUNT, with othersMy blood hath been too cold and temperate,Unapt to stir at these indignities,And you have found me, for accordinglyYou tread upon my patience: but be sureI will from henceforth rather be myself,Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition,Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,And therefore lost that title of respectWhich the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.Our house, my sovereign liege, little deservesThe scourge of greatness to be used on it,And that same greatness too which our own handsHave holp to make so portly.My lord.--Worcester, get thee gone, for I do seeDanger and disobedience in thine eye:O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,And majesty might never yet endureThe moody frontier of a servant brow.You have good leave to leave us: when we needYour use and counsel, we shall send for you.Exit WorcesterYou were about to speak.To NorthYea, my good lord.Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,Were, as he says, not with such strength deniedAs is deliver'd to your majesty:Either envy, therefore, or misprisonIs guilty of this fault and not my son.My liege, I did deny no prisoners.But I remember, when the fight was done,When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd,Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reap'dShow'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home,He was perfumed like a milliner,And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he heldA pouncet-box, which ever and anonHe gave his nose and took't away again,Who therewith angry, when it next came there,Took it in snuff, and still he smiled and talk'd,And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,To bring a slovenly unhandsome corseBetwixt the wind and his nobility.With many holiday and lady termsHe question'd me, amongst the rest, demandedMy prisoners in your majesty's behalf.I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,To be so pester'd with a popinjay,Out of my grief and my impatience,Answer'd neglectingly I know not what,He should or he should not, for he made me madTo see him shine so brisk and smell so sweetAnd talk so like a waiting-gentlewomanOf guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!--And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earthWas parmaceti for an inward bruise,And that it was great pity, so it was,This villanous salt-petre should be digg'dOut of the bowels of the harmless earth,Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'dSo cowardly, and but for these vile guns,He would himself have been a soldier.This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,I answer'd indirectly, as I said,And I beseech you, let not his reportCome current for an accusationBetwixt my love and your high majesty.The circumstance consider'd, good my lord,Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had saidTo such a person and in such a place,At such a time, with all the rest retold,May reasonably die and never riseTo do him wrong or any way impeachWhat then he said, so he unsay it now.Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,But with proviso and exception,That we at our own charge shall ransom straightHis brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'dThe lives of those that he did lead to fightAgainst that great magician, damn'd Glendower,Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of MarchHath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?Shall we but treason? and indent with fears,When they have lost and forfeited themselves?No, on the barren mountains let him starve,For I shall never hold that man my friendWhose tongue shall ask me for one penny costTo ransom home revolted Mortimer.Revolted Mortimer!He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,But by the chance of war, to prove that trueNeeds no more but one tongue for all those wounds,Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he tookWhen on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,In single opposition, hand to hand,He did confound the best part of an hourIn changing hardiment with great Glendower:Three times they breathed and three times didthey drink,Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,Bloodstained with these valiant combatants.Never did base and rotten policyColour her working with such deadly wounds,Nor could the noble MortimerReceive so many, and all willingly:Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him,He never did encounter with Glendower:I tell thee,He durst as well have met the devil aloneAs Owen Glendower for an enemy.Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforthLet me not hear you speak of Mortimer:Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,Or you shall hear in such a kind from meAs will displease you. My Lord Northumberland,We licence your departure with your son.Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and trainAn if the devil come and roar for them,I will not send them: I will after straightAnd tell him so, for I will ease my heart,Albeit I make a hazard of my head.What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile:Here comes your uncle.Re-enter WORCESTERSpeak of Mortimer!'Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soulWant mercy, if I do not join with him:Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,But I will lift the down-trod MortimerAs high in the air as this unthankful king,As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.Who struck this heat up after I was gone?He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners,And when I urged the ransom once againOf my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'dBy Richard that dead is the next of blood?He was, I heard the proclamation:And then it was when the unhappy king,--Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forthUpon his Irish expedition,From whence he intercepted did returnTo be deposed and shortly murdered.And for whose death we in the world's wide mouthLive scandalized and foully spoken of.But soft, I pray you, did King Richard thenProclaim my brother Edmund MortimerHeir to the crown?He did, myself did hear it.Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,That wished him on the barren mountains starve.But shall it be that you, that set the crownUpon the head of this forgetful manAnd for his sake wear the detested blotOf murderous subornation, shall it be,That you a world of curses undergo,Being the agents, or base second means,The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?O, pardon me that I descend so low,To show the line and the predicamentWherein you range under this subtle king,Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,Or fill up chronicles in time to come,That men of your nobility and powerDid gage them both in an unjust behalf,As both of you--God pardon it!--have done,To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?And shall it in more shame be further spoken,That you are fool'd, discarded and shook offBy him for whom these shames ye underwent?No, yet time serves wherein you may redeemYour banish'd honours and restore yourselvesInto the good thoughts of the world again,Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contemptOf this proud king, who studies day and nightTo answer all the debt he owes to youEven with the bloody payment of your deaths:Therefore, I say--Peace, cousin, say no more:And now I will unclasp a secret book,And to your quick-conceiving discontentsI'll read you matter deep and dangerous,As full of peril and adventurous spiritAs to o'er-walk a current roaring loudOn the unsteadfast footing of a spear.If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim:Send danger from the east unto the west,So honour cross it from the north to south,And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirsTo rouse a lion than to start a hare!Imagination of some great exploitDrives him beyond the bounds of patience.By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,Or dive into the bottom of the deep,Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,And pluck up drowned honour by the locks,So he that doth redeem her thence might wearWithout corrival, all her dignities:But out upon this half-faced fellowship!He apprehends a world of figures here,But not the form of what he should attend.Good cousin, give me audience for a while.I cry you mercy.Those same noble ScotsThat are your prisoners,--I'll keep them all,By God, he shall not have a Scot of them,No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not:I'll keep them, by this hand.You start awayAnd lend no ear unto my purposes.Those prisoners you shall keep.Nay, I will, that's flat:He said he would not ransom Mortimer,Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer,But I will find him when he lies asleep,And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!'Nay,I'll have a starling shall be taught to speakNothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it himTo keep his anger still in motion.Hear you, cousin, a word.All studies here I solemnly defy,Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,But that I think his father loves him notAnd would be glad he met with some mischance,I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale.Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to youWhen you are better temper'd to attend.Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient foolArt thou to break into this woman's mood,Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hearOf this vile politician, Bolingbroke.In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?--A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire,'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept,His uncle York, where I first bow'd my kneeUnto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,--'Sblood!--When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.At Berkley castle.You say true:Why, what a candy deal of courtesyThis fawning greyhound then did proffer me!Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,'And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin,'O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me!Good uncle, tell your tale, I have done.Nay, if you have not, to it again,We will stay your leisure.I have done, i' faith.Then once more to your Scottish prisoners.Deliver them up without their ransom straight,And make the Douglas' son your only meanFor powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasonsWhich I shall send you written, be assured,Will easily be granted. You, my lord,To NorthumberlandYour son in Scotland being thus employ'd,Shall secretly into the bosom creepOf that same noble prelate, well beloved,The archbishop.Of York, is it not?True, who bears hardHis brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.I speak not this in estimation,As what I think might be, but what I knowIs ruminated, plotted and set down,And only stays but to behold the faceOf that occasion that shall bring it on.I smell it: upon my life, it will do well.Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip.Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot,And then the power of Scotland and of York,To join with Mortimer, ha?And so they shall.In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,To save our heads by raising of a head,For, bear ourselves as even as we can,The king will always think him in our debt,And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,Till he hath found a time to pay us home:And see already how he doth beginTo make us strangers to his looks of love.He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him.Cousin, farewell: no further go in thisThan I by letters shall direct your course.When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer,Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,Which now we hold at much uncertainty.Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust.Uncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be shortTill fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!ExeuntACT IISCENE I. Rochester. An inn yard.Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his handHeigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll behanged: Charles' wain is over the new chimney, andyet our horse not packed. What, ostler![Within]   Anon, anon.I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocksin the point, poor jade, is wrung in the withers outof all cess.Enter another CarrierPeas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and thatis the next way to give poor jades the bots: thishouse is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oatsrose, it was the death of him.I think this be the most villanous house in allLondon road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a kingchristen could be better bit than I have been sincethe first cock.Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then weleak in your chimney, and your chamber-lie breedsfleas like a loach.What, ostler! come away and be hanged!I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,to be delivered as far as Charing-cross.God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quitestarved. What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thounever an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pateon thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged!hast thou no faith in thee?Enter GADSHILLGood morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?I think it be two o'clock.I pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my geldingin the stable.Nay, by God, soft, I know a trick worth two of that, i' faith.I pray thee, lend me thine.Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quothhe? marry, I'll see thee hanged first.Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrantthee. Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up thegentleman: they will along with company, for theyhave great charge.Exeunt carriersWhat, ho! chamberlain![Within]  At hand, quoth pick-purse.That's even as fair as--at hand, quoth thechamberlain, for thou variest no more from pickingof purses than giving direction doth from labouring,thou layest the plot how.Enter ChamberlainGood morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current thatI told you yesternight: there's a franklin in thewild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks withhim in gold: I heard him tell it to one of hiscompany last night at supper, a kind of auditor, onethat hath abundance of charge too, God knows what.They are up already, and call for eggs and butter,they will away presently.Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas'clerks, I'll give thee this neck.No, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for thehangman, for I know thou worshippest St. Nicholasas truly as a man of falsehood may.What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang,I'll make a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang, oldSir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is nostarveling. Tut! there are other Trojans that thoudreamest not of, the which for sport sake arecontent to do the profession some grace, that would,if matters should be looked into, for their owncredit sake, make all whole. I am joined with nofoot-land rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms,but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters andgreat oneyers, such as can hold in, such as willstrike sooner than speak, and speak sooner thandrink, and drink sooner than pray: and yet, zounds,I lie, for they pray continually to their saint, thecommonwealth, or rather, not pray to her, but preyon her, for they ride up and down on her and makeher their boots.What, the commonwealth their boots? will she holdout water in foul way?She will, she will, justice hath liquored her. Westeal as in a castle, cocksure, we have the receiptof fern-seed, we walk invisible.Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding tothe night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible.Give me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in ourpurchase, as I am a true man.Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.Go to, 'homo' is a common name to all men. Bid theostler bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell,you muddy knave.ExeuntSCENE II. The highway, near Gadshill.Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINSCome, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff'shorse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.Stand close.Enter FALSTAFFPoins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dostthou keep!Where's Poins, Hal?He is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him.I am accursed to rob in that thief's company: therascal hath removed my horse, and tied him I knownot where. If I travel but four foot by the squierfurther afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubtnot but to die a fair death for all this, if I'scape hanging for killing that rogue. I haveforsworn his company hourly any time this two andtwenty years, and yet I am bewitched with therogue's company. If the rascal hath not given memedicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged, itcould not be else: I have drunk medicines. Poins!Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto!I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An 'twerenot as good a deed as drink, to turn true man and toleave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet thatever chewed with a tooth. Eight yards of unevenground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me,and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough:a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!They whistleWhew! A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, yourogues, give me my horse, and be hanged!Peace, ye fat-guts! lie down, lay thine ear closeto the ground and list if thou canst hear the treadof travellers.Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down?'Sblood, I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afootagain for all the coin in thy father's exchequer.What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?Thou liest, thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse,good king's son.Out, ye rogue! shall I be your ostler?Go, hang thyself in thine own heir-apparentgarters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. An Ihave not ballads made on you all and sung to filthytunes, let a cup of sack be my poison: when a jestis so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.Enter GADSHILL, BARDOLPH and PETOStand.So I do, against my will.O, 'tis our setter: I know his voice. Bardolph,what news?Case ye, case ye, on with your vizards: there 'smoney of the king's coming down the hill, 'tis goingto the king's exchequer.You lie, ye rogue, 'tis going to the king's tavern.There's enough to make us all.To be hanged.Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane,Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scapefrom your encounter, then they light on us.How many be there of them?Some eight or ten.'Zounds, will they not rob us?What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather,but yet no coward, Hal.Well, we leave that to the proof.Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge:when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him.Farewell, and stand fast.Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.Ned, where are our disguises?Here, hard by: stand close.Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and POINSNow, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I:every man to his business.Enter the TravellersCome, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses downthe hill, we'll walk afoot awhile, and ease our legs.Stand!Jesus bless us!Strike, down with them, cut the villains' throats:ah! whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! theyhate us youth: down with them: fleece them.O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, yefat chuffs: I would your store were here! On,bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must live.You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith.Here they rob them and bind them. ExeuntRe-enter PRINCE HENRY and POINSThe thieves have bound the true men. Now could thouand I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, itwould be argument for a week, laughter for a monthand a good jest for ever.Stand close, I hear them coming.Enter the Thieves againCome, my masters, let us share, and then to  horsebefore day. An the Prince and Poins be not twoarrant cowards, there's no equity stirring: there'sno more valour in that Poins than in a wild-duck.Your money!Villains!As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon  them, they all run away, and Falstaff, after a blow or two, runs away too, leaving the booty behind themGot with much ease. Now merrily to horse:The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fearSo strongly that they dare not meet each other,Each takes his fellow for an officer.Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,And lards the lean earth as he walks along:Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.How the rogue roar'd!ExeuntSCENE III. Warkworth castleEnter HOTSPUR, solus, reading a letter'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be wellcontented to be there, in respect of the love I bearyour house.' He could be contented: why is he not,then? In respect of the love he bears our house:he shows in this, he loves his own barn better thanhe loves our house. Let me see some more. 'Thepurpose you undertake is dangerous,'--why, that'scertain: 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, todrink, but I tell you, my lord fool, out of thisnettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'Thepurpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends youhave named uncertain, the time itself unsorted, andyour whole plot too light for the counterpoise of sogreat an opposition.' Say you so, say you so? I sayunto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, andyou lie.  What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord,our plot is a good plot as ever was laid, ourfriends true and constant: a good plot, goodfriends, and full of expectation, an excellent plot,very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue isthis! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and thegeneral course of action. 'Zounds, an I were now bythis rascal, I could brain him with his lady's fan.Is there not my father, my uncle and myself? lordEdmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower?is there not besides the Douglas? have I not alltheir letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of thenext month? and are they not some of them setforward already? What a pagan rascal is this! aninfidel! Ha! you shall see now in very sincerityof fear and cold heart, will he to the king and layopen all our proceedings. O, I could divide myselfand go to buffets, for moving such a dish ofskim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him!let him tell the king: we are prepared. I will setforward to-night.Enter LADY PERCYHow now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours.O, my good lord, why are you thus alone?For what offence have I this fortnight beenA banish'd woman from my Harry's bed?Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from theeThy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep?Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,And start so often when thou sit'st alone?Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks,And given my treasures and my rights of theeTo thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy?In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'dOf sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain,And all the currents of a heady fight.Thy spirit within thee hath been so at warAnd thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep,That beads of sweat have stood upon thy browLike bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,And in thy face strange motions have appear'd,Such as we see when men restrain their breathOn some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,And I must know it, else he loves me not.What, ho!Enter ServantIs Gilliams with the packet gone?He is, my lord, an hour ago.Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?One horse, my lord, he brought even now.What horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not?It is, my lord.That roan shall by my throne.Well, I will back him straight: O esperance!Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.Exit ServantBut hear you, my lord.What say'st thou, my lady?What is it carries you away?Why, my horse, my love, my horse.Out, you mad-headed ape!A weasel hath not such a deal of spleenAs you are toss'd with. In faith,I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.I fear my brother Mortimer doth stirAbout his title, and hath sent for youTo line his enterprise: but if you go,--So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.Come, come, you paraquito, answer meDirectly unto this question that I ask:In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.Away,Away, you trifler! Love! I love thee not,I care not for thee, Kate: this is no worldTo play with mammets and to tilt with lips:We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns,And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thouhave with me?Do you not love me? do you not, indeed?Well, do not then, for since you love me not,I will not love myself. Do you not love me?Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.Come, wilt thou see me ride?And when I am on horseback, I will swearI love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,I must not have you henceforth question meWhither I go, nor reason whereabout:Whither I must, I must, and, to conclude,This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.I know you wise, but yet no farther wiseThan Harry Percy's wife: constant you are,But yet a woman: and for secrecy,No lady closer, for I well believeThou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.How! so far?Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate:Whither I go, thither shall you go too,To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you.Will this content you, Kate?It must of force.ExeuntSCENE IV. The Boar's-Head Tavern, Eastcheap.Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINSNed, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend methy hand to laugh a little.Where hast been, Hal?With three or four loggerheads amongst three or fourscore hogsheads. I have sounded the verybase-string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brotherto a leash of drawers, and can call them all bytheir christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis.They take it already upon their salvation, thatthough I be but the prince of Wales, yet I am kingof courtesy, and tell me flatly I am no proud Jack,like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, agood boy, by the Lord, so they call me, and when Iam king of England, I shall command all the goodlads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, dyeingscarlet, and when you breathe in your watering, theycry  'hem!' and bid you play it off. To conclude, Iam so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour,that I can drink with any tinker in his own languageduring my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lostmuch honour, that thou wert not with me in this sweetaction. But, sweet Ned,--to sweeten which name ofNed, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clappedeven now into my hand by an under-skinker, one thatnever spake other English in his life than 'Eightshillings and sixpence' and 'You are welcome,' withthis shrill addition, 'Anon, anon, sir! Score a pintof bastard in the Half-Moon,' or so. But, Ned, todrive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee,do thou stand in some by-room, while I question mypuny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar, and dothou never leave calling 'Francis,' that his taleto me may be nothing but 'Anon.' Step aside, andI'll show thee a precedent.Francis!Thou art perfect.Francis!Exit POINSEnter FRANCISAnon, anon, sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.Come hither, Francis.My lord?How long hast thou to serve, Francis?Forsooth, five years, and as much as to--[Within]  Francis!Anon, anon, sir.Five year! by'r lady, a long lease for the clinkingof pewter. But, Francis, darest thou be so valiantas to play the coward with thy indenture and show ita fair pair of heels and run from it?O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books inEngland, I could find in my heart.[Within]  Francis!Anon, sir.How old art thou, Francis?Let me see--about Michaelmas next I shall be--[Within]  Francis!Anon, sir. Pray stay a little, my lord.Nay, but hark you, Francis: for the sugar thougavest me,'twas a pennyworth, wast't not?O Lord, I would it had been two!I will give thee for it a thousand pound: ask mewhen thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.[Within]  Francis!Anon, anon.Anon, Francis? No, Francis, but to-morrow, Francis,or, Francis, o' Thursday, or indeed, Francis, whenthou wilt. But, Francis!My lord?Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button,not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter,smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch,--O Lord, sir, who do you mean?Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink,for look you, Francis, your white canvas doubletwill sully: in Barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much.What, sir?[Within]  Francis!Away, you rogue! dost thou not hear them call?Here they both call him, the drawer stands amazed, not knowing which way to goEnter VintnerWhat, standest thou still, and hearest such acalling? Look to the guests within.Exit FrancisMy lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, areat the door: shall I let them in?Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.Exit VintnerPoins!Re-enter POINSAnon, anon, sir.Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are atthe door: shall we be merry?As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye, whatcunning match have you made with this jest of thedrawer? come, what's the issue?I am now of all humours that have showed themselveshumours since the old days of goodman Adam to thepupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight.Re-enter FRANCISWhat's o'clock, Francis?Anon, anon, sir.ExitThat ever this fellow should have fewer words than aparrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry isupstairs and downstairs, his eloquence the parcel ofa reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's mind, theHotspur of the north, he that kills me some six orseven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes hishands, and says to his wife 'Fie upon this quietlife! I want work.' 'O my sweet Harry,' says she,'how many hast thou killed to-day?' 'Give my roanhorse a drench,' says he, and answers 'Somefourteen,' an hour after, 'a trifle, a trifle.' Iprithee, call in Falstaff: I'll play Percy, andthat damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer hiswife. 'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call in tallow.Enter FALSTAFF, GADSHILL, BARDOLPH, and PETO, FRANCIS following with wineWelcome, Jack: where hast thou been?A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too!marry, and amen! Give me a cup of sack, boy. Ere Ilead this life long, I'll sew nether stocks and mendthem and foot them too. A plague of all cowards!Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?He drinksDidst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?pitiful-hearted Titan, that melted at the sweet taleof the sun's! if thou didst, then behold that compound.You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there isnothing but roguery to be found in villanous man:yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with limein it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack,die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, benot forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I ashotten herring. There live not three good menunhanged in England, and one of them is fat andgrows old: God help the while! a bad world, I say.I would I were a weaver, I could sing psalms or anything. A plague of all cowards, I say still.How now, wool-sack! what mutter you?A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thykingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thysubjects afore thee like a flock of wild-geese,I'll never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales!Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?Are not you a coward? answer me to that: and Poins there?'Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by theLord, I'll stab thee.I call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I callthee coward: but I would give a thousand pound Icould run as fast as thou canst. You are straightenough in the shoulders, you care not who sees yourback: call you that backing of your friends? Aplague upon such backing! give me them that willface me. Give me a cup of sack: I am a rogue, if Idrunk to-day.O villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thoudrunkest last.All's one for that.He drinksA plague of all cowards, still say I.What's the matter?What's the matter! there be four of us here haveta'en a thousand pound this day morning.Where is it, Jack? where is it?Where is it! taken from us it is: a hundred uponpoor four of us.What, a hundred, man?I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with adozen of them two hours together. I have 'scaped bymiracle. I am eight times thrust through thedoublet, four through the hose, my buckler cutthrough and through, my sword hacked like ahand-saw--ecce signum! I never dealt better sinceI was a man: all would not do. A plague of allcowards! Let them speak: if they speak more orless than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.Speak, sirs, how was it?We four set upon some dozen--Sixteen at least, my lord.And bound them.No, no, they were not bound.You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or Iam a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.What, fought you with them all?All! I know not what you call all, but if I foughtnot with fifty of them, I am a bunch of radish: ifthere were not two or three and fifty upon poor oldJack, then am I no two-legged creature.Pray God you have not murdered some of them.Nay, that's past praying for: I have peppered twoof them, two I am sure I have paid, two roguesin buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tellthee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thouknowest my old ward, here I lay and thus I bore mypoint. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--What, four? thou saidst but two even now.Four, Hal, I told thee four.Ay, ay, he said four.These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust atme. I made me no more ado but took all their sevenpoints in my target, thus.Seven? why, there were but four even now.In buckram?Ay, four, in buckram suits.Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.Prithee, let him alone, we shall have more anon.Dost thou hear me, Hal?Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These ninein buckram that I told thee of--So, two more already.Their points being broken,--Down fell their hose.Began to give me ground: but I followed me close,came in foot and hand, and with a thought seven ofthe eleven I paid.O monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!But, as the devil would have it, three misbegottenknaves in Kendal green came at my back and let driveat me, for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldstnot see thy hand.These lies are like their father that begets them,gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why, thouclay-brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thouwhoreson, obscene, grease tallow-catch,--What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truththe truth?Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendalgreen, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thyhand? come, tell us your reason: what sayest thou to this?Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.What, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at thestrappado, or all the racks in the world, I wouldnot tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason oncompulsion! If reasons were as plentiful asblackberries, I would give no man a reason uponcompulsion, I.I'll be no longer guilty of this sin, this sanguinecoward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker,this huge hill of flesh,--'Sblood, you starveling, you elf-skin, you driedneat's tongue, you bull's pizzle, you stock-fish! Ofor breath to utter what is like thee! youtailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase, you vilestanding-tuck,--Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again: andwhen thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons,hear me speak but this.Mark, Jack.We two saw you four set on four and bound them, andwere masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plaintale shall put you down. Then did we two set on youfour, and, with a word, out-faced you from yourprize, and have it, yea, and can show it you here inthe house: and, Falstaff, you carried your gutsaway as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roaredfor mercy and still run and roared, as ever I heardbull-calf. What a slave art thou, to hack thy swordas thou hast done, and then say it was in fight!What trick, what device, what starting-hole, canstthou now find out to hide thee from this open andapparent shame?Come, let's hear, Jack, what trick hast thou now?By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye.Why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill theheir-apparent? should I turn upon the true prince?why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: butbeware instinct, the lion will not touch the trueprince. Instinct is a great matter, I was now acoward on instinct. I shall think the better ofmyself and thee during my life, I for a valiantlion, and thou for a true prince. But, by the Lord,lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clapto the doors: watch to-night, pray to-morrow.Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titlesof good fellowship come to you! What, shall we bemerry? shall we have a play extempore?Content, and the argument shall be thy running away.Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!Enter HostessO Jesu, my lord the prince!How now, my lady the hostess! what sayest thou tome?Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court atdoor would speak with you: he says he comes fromyour father.Give him as much as will make him a royal man, andsend him back again to my mother.What manner of man is he?An old man.What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? ShallI give him his answer?Prithee, do, Jack.'Faith, and I'll send him packing.Exit FALSTAFFNow, sirs: by'r lady, you fought fair, so did you,Peto, so did you, Bardolph: you are lions too, youran away upon instinct, you will not touch the trueprince, no, fie!'Faith, I ran when I saw others run.'Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff'ssword so hacked?Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he wouldswear truth out of England but he would make youbelieve it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass tomake them bleed, and then to beslubber our garmentswith it and swear it was the blood of true men. Idid that I did not this seven year before, I blushedto hear his monstrous devices.O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen yearsago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever sincethou hast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire andsword on thy side, and yet thou rannest away: whatinstinct hadst thou for it?My lord, do you see these meteors? do you beholdthese exhalations?I do.What think you they portend?Hot livers and cold purses.Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.No, if rightly taken, halter.Re-enter FALSTAFFHere comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone.How now, my sweet creature of bombast!How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?My own knee! when I was about thy years, Hal, I wasnot an eagle's talon in the waist, I could havecrept into any alderman's thumb-ring: a plague ofsighing and grief! it blows a man up like abladder. There's villanous news abroad: here wasSir John Bracy from your father, you must to thecourt in the morning. That same mad fellow of thenorth, Percy, and he of Wales, that gave Amamon thebastinado and made Lucifer cuckold and swore thedevil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welshhook--what a plague call you him?O, Glendower.Owen, Owen, the same, and his son-in-law Mortimer,and old Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot ofScots, Douglas, that runs o' horseback up a hillperpendicular,--He that rides at high speed and with his pistolkills a sparrow flying.You have hit it.So did he never the sparrow.Well, that rascal hath good mettle in him, he will not run.Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him sofor running!O' horseback, ye cuckoo, but afoot he will not budge a foot.Yes, Jack, upon instinct.I grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too,and one Mordake, and a thousand blue-caps more:Worcester is stolen away to-night, thy father'sbeard is turned white with the news: you may buyland now as cheap as stinking mackerel.Why, then, it is like, if there come a hot June andthis civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheadsas they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.By the mass, lad, thou sayest true, it is like weshall have good trading that way. But tell me, Hal,art not thou horrible afeard? thou beingheir-apparent, could the world pick thee out threesuch enemies again as that fiend Douglas, thatspirit Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thounot horribly afraid? doth not thy blood thrill atit?Not a whit, i' faith, I lack some of thy instinct.Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thoucomest to thy father: if thou love me, practise an answer.Do thou stand for my father, and examine me upon theparticulars of my life.Shall I? content: this chair shall be my state,this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.Thy state is taken for a joined-stool, thy goldensceptre for a leaden dagger, and thy precious richcrown for a pitiful bald crown!Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee,now shalt thou be moved. Give me a cup of sack tomake my eyes look red, that it may be thought I havewept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do itin King Cambyses' vein.Well, here is my leg.And here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!Weep not, sweet queen, for trickling tears are vain.O, the father, how he holds his countenance!For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen,For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotryplayers as ever I see!Peace, good pint-pot, peace, good tickle-brain.Harry, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thytime, but also how thou art accompanied: for thoughthe camomile, the more it is trodden on the fasterit grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted thesooner it wears. That thou art my son, I havepartly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion,but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and afoolish-hanging of thy nether lip, that doth warrantme. If then thou be son to me, here lies the point,why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shallthe blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eatblackberries? a question not to be asked. Shallthe sun of England prove a thief and take purses? aquestion to be asked. There is a thing, Harry,which thou hast often heard of and it is known tomany in our land by the name of pitch: this pitch,as ancient writers do report, doth defile, so doththe company thou keepest: for, Harry, now I do notspeak to thee in drink but in tears, not inpleasure but in passion, not in words only, but inwoes also: and yet there is a virtuous man whom Ihave often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.What manner of man, an it like your majesty?A goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent, of acheerful look, a pleasing eye and a most noblecarriage, and, as I think, his age some fifty, or,by'r lady, inclining to three score, and now Iremember me, his name is Falstaff: if that manshould be lewdly given, he deceiveth me, for, Harry,I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may beknown by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then,peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in thatFalstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tellme now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hastthou been this month?Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me,and I'll play my father.Depose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, somajestically, both in word and matter, hang me up bythe heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.Well, here I am set.And here I stand: judge, my masters.Now, Harry, whence come you?My noble lord, from Eastcheap.The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.'Sblood, my lord, they are false: nay, I'll tickleye for a young prince, i' faith.Swearest thou, ungracious boy? henceforth ne'er lookon me. Thou art violently carried away from grace:there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of anold fat man, a tun of man is thy companion. Whydost thou converse with that trunk of humours, thatbolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcelof dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffedcloak-bag of guts, that roasted Manningtree ox withthe pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, thatgrey iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity inyears? Wherein is he good, but to taste sack anddrink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve acapon and eat it? wherein cunning, but in craft?wherein crafty, but in villany? wherein villanous,but in all things? wherein worthy, but in nothing?I would your grace would take me with you: whommeans your grace?That villanous abominable misleader of youth,Falstaff, that old white-bearded Satan.My lord, the man I know.I know thou dost.But to say I know more harm in him than in myself,were to say more than I know. That he is old, themore the pity, his white hairs do witness it, butthat he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster,that I utterly deny. If sack and sugar be a fault,God help the wicked! if to be old and merry be asin, then many an old host that I know is damned: ifto be fat be to be hated, then Pharaoh's lean kineare to be loved. No, my good lord, banish Peto,banish Bardolph, banish Poins: but for sweet JackFalstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff,valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more valiant,being, as he is, old Jack Falstaff, banish not himthy Harry's company, banish not him thy Harry'scompany: banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.I do, I will.A knocking heardExeunt Hostess, FRANCIS, and BARDOLPHRe-enter BARDOLPH, runningO, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a mostmonstrous watch is at the door.Out, ye rogue! Play out the play: I have much tosay in the behalf of that Falstaff.Re-enter the HostessO Jesu, my lord, my lord!Heigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick:what's the matter?The sheriff and all the watch are at the door: theyare come to search the house. Shall I let them in?Dost thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece ofgold a counterfeit: thou art essentially mad,without seeming so.And thou a natural coward, without instinct.I deny your major: if you will deny the sheriff,so, if not, let him enter: if I become not a cartas well as another man, a plague on my bringing up!I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.Go, hide thee behind the arras: the rest walk upabove. Now, my masters, for a true face and goodconscience.Both which I have had: but their date is out, andtherefore I'll hide me.Call in the sheriff.Exeunt all except PRINCE HENRY and PETOEnter Sheriff and the CarrierNow, master sheriff, what is your will with me?First, pardon me, my lord. A hue and cryHath follow'd certain men unto this house.What men?One of them is well known, my gracious lord,A gross fat man.As fat as butter.The man, I do assure you, is not here,For I myself at this time have employ'd him.And, sheriff, I will engage my word to theeThat I will, by to-morrow dinner-time,Send him to answer thee, or any man,For any thing he shall be charged withal:And so let me entreat you leave the house.I will, my lord. There are two gentlemenHave in this robbery lost three hundred marks.It may be so: if he have robb'd these men,He shall be answerable, and so farewell.Good night, my noble lord.I think it is good morrow, is it not?Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.Exeunt Sheriff and CarrierThis oily rascal is known as well as Paul's. Go,call him forth.Falstaff!--Fast asleep behind the arras, andsnorting like a horse.Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets.He searcheth his pockets, and findeth certain papersWhat hast thou found?Nothing but papers, my lord.Let's see what they be: read them.[Reads]  Item, A capon,. . 2s. 2d.Item, Sauce,. . . 4d.Item, Sack, two gallons, 5s. 8d.Item, Anchovies and sack after supper, 2s. 6d.Item, Bread,        ob.O monstrous! but one half-penny-worth of bread tothis intolerable deal of sack! What there is else,keep close, we'll read it at more advantage: therelet him sleep till day. I'll to the court in themorning. We must all to the wars, and thy placeshall be honourable. I'll procure this fat rogue acharge of foot, and I know his death will be amarch of twelve-score. The money shall be paidback again with advantage. Be with me betimes inthe morning, and so, good morrow, Peto.ExeuntGood morrow, good my lord.ACT IIISCENE I. Bangor. The Archdeacon's house.Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, MORTIMER, and GLENDOWERThese promises are fair, the parties sure,And our induction full of prosperous hope.Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower,Will you sit down?And uncle Worcester: a plague upon it!I have forgot the map.No, here it is.Sit, cousin Percy, sit, good cousin Hotspur,For by that name as oft as LancasterDoth speak of you, his cheek looks pale and withA rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.And you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.I cannot blame him: at my nativityThe front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,Of burning cressets, and at my birthThe frame and huge foundation of the earthShaked like a coward.Why, so it would have done at the same season, ifyour mother's cat had but kittened, though yourselfhad never been born.I say the earth did shake when I was born.And I say the earth was not of my mind,If you suppose as fearing you it shook.The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,And not in fear of your nativity.Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forthIn strange eruptions, oft the teeming earthIs with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'dBy the imprisoning of unruly windWithin her womb, which, for enlargement striving,Shakes the old beldam earth and topples downSteeples and moss-grown towers. At your birthOur grandam earth, having this distemperature,In passion shook.Cousin, of many menI do not bear these crossings. Give me leaveTo tell you once again that at my birthThe front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,The goats ran from the mountains, and the herdsWere strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.These signs have mark'd me extraordinary,And all the courses of my life do showI am not in the roll of common men.Where is he living, clipp'd in with the seaThat chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,Which calls me pupil, or hath read to me?And bring him out that is but woman's sonCan trace me in the tedious ways of artAnd hold me pace in deep experiments.I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.I'll to dinner.Peace, cousin Percy, you will make him mad.I can call spirits from the vasty deep.Why, so can I, or so can any man,But will they come when you do call for them?Why, I can teach you, cousin, to commandThe devil.And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devilBy telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil.If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence.O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made headAgainst my power, thrice from the banks of WyeAnd sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent himBootless home and weather-beaten back.Home without boots, and in foul weather too!How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?Come, here's the map: shall we divide our rightAccording to our threefold order ta'en?The archdeacon hath divided itInto three limits very equally:England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,By south and east is to my part assign'd:All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,And all the fertile land within that bound,To Owen Glendower: and, dear coz, to youThe remnant northward, lying off from Trent.And our indentures tripartite are drawn,Which being sealed interchangeably,A business that this night may execute,To-morrow, cousin Percy, you and IAnd my good Lord of Worcester will set forthTo meet your father and the Scottish power,As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.My father Glendower is not ready yet,Not shall we need his help these fourteen days.Within that space you may have drawn togetherYour tenants, friends and neighbouring gentlemen.A shorter time shall send me to you, lords:And in my conduct shall your ladies come,From whom you now must steal and take no leave,For there will be a world of water shedUpon the parting of your wives and you.Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,In quantity equals not one of yours:See how this river comes me cranking in,And cuts me from the best of all my landA huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.I'll have the current in this place damm'd up,And here the smug and silver Trent shall runIn a new channel, fair and evenly,It shall not wind with such a deep indent,To rob me of so rich a bottom here.Not wind? it shall, it must, you see it doth.Yea, butMark how he bears his course, and runs me upWith like advantage on the other side,Gelding the opposed continent as muchAs on the other side it takes from you.Yea, but a little charge will trench him hereAnd on this north side win this cape of land,And then he runs straight and even.I'll have it so: a little charge will do it.I'll not have it alter'd.Will not you?No, nor you shall not.Who shall say me nay?Why, that will I.Let me not understand you, then, speak it in Welsh.I can speak English, lord, as well as you,For I was train'd up in the English court,Where, being but young, I framed to the harpMany an English ditty lovely wellAnd gave the tongue a helpful ornament,A virtue that was never seen in you.Marry,And I am glad of it with all my heart:I had rather be a kitten and cry mewThan one of these same metre ballad-mongers,I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd,Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree,And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,Nothing so much as mincing poetry:'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.Come, you shall have Trent turn'd.I do not care: I'll give thrice so much landTo any well-deserving friend,But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.Are the indentures drawn? shall we be gone?The moon shines fair, you may away by night:I'll haste the writer and withalBreak with your wives of your departure hence:I am afraid my daughter will run mad,So much she doteth on her Mortimer.Exit GLENDOWERFie, cousin Percy! how you cross my father!I cannot choose: sometime he angers meWith telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant,Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,And of a dragon and a finless fish,A clip-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven,A couching lion and a ramping cat,And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuffAs puts me from my faith. I tell you what,He held me last night at least nine hoursIn reckoning up the several devils' namesThat were his lackeys: I cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,'But mark'd him not a word. O, he is as tediousAs a tired horse, a railing wife,Worse than a smoky house: I had rather liveWith cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,Than feed on cates and have him talk to meIn any summer-house in Christendom.In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,Exceedingly well read, and profitedIn strange concealments, valiant as a lionAnd as wondrous affable and as bountifulAs mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?He holds your temper in a high respectAnd curbs himself even of his natural scopeWhen you come 'cross his humour, faith, he does:I warrant you, that man is not aliveMight so have tempted him as you have done,Without the taste of danger and reproof:But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame,And since your coming hither have done enoughTo put him quite beside his patience.You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault:Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,--And that's the dearest grace it renders you,--Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,Defect of manners, want of government,Pride, haughtiness, opinion and disdain:The least of which haunting a noblemanLoseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stainUpon the beauty of all parts besides,Beguiling them of commendation.Well, I am school'd: good manners be your speed!Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.Re-enter GLENDOWER with the ladiesThis is the deadly spite that angers me,My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.My daughter weeps: she will not part with you,She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.Good father, tell her that she and my aunt PercyShall follow in your conduct speedily.Glendower speaks to her in Welsh, and she answers him in the sameShe is desperate here, a peevish self-wind harlotry,one that no persuasion can do good upon.The lady speaks in WelshI understand thy looks: that pretty WelshWhich thou pour'st down from these swelling heavensI am too perfect in, and, but for shame,In such a parley should I answer thee.The lady speaks again in WelshI understand thy kisses and thou mine,And that's a feeling disputation:But I will never be a truant, love,Till I have learned thy language, for thy tongueMakes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn'd,Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,With ravishing division, to her lute.Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.The lady speaks again in WelshO, I am ignorance itself in this!She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you downAnd rest your gentle head upon her lap,And she will sing the song that pleaseth youAnd on your eyelids crown the god of sleep.Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleepAs is the difference betwixt day and nightThe hour before the heavenly-harness'd teamBegins his golden progress in the east.With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing:By that time will our book, I think, be drawnDo so,And those musicians that shall play to youHang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down: come,quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.Go, ye giddy goose.The music playsNow I perceive the devil understands Welsh,And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.By'r lady, he is a good musician.Then should you be nothing but musical for you arealtogether governed by humours. Lie still, ye thief,and hear the lady sing in Welsh.I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.Wouldst thou have thy head broken?No.Then be still.Neither,'tis a woman's fault.Now God help thee!To the Welsh lady's bed.What's that?Peace! she sings.Here the lady sings a Welsh songCome, Kate, I'll have your song too.Not mine, in good sooth.Not yours, in good sooth! Heart! you swear like acomfit-maker's wife. 'Not you, in good sooth,' and'as true as I live,' and 'as God shall mend me,' and'as sure as day,'And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths,As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,A good mouth-filling oath, and leave 'in sooth,'And such protest of pepper-gingerbread,To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.Come, sing.I will not sing.'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breastteacher. An the indentures be drawn, I'll awaywithin these two hours, and so, come in when ye will.ExitCome, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slowAs hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.By this our book is drawn, we'll but seal,And then to horse immediately.With all my heart.ExeuntSCENE II. London. The palace.Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE HENRY, and othersLords, give us leave, the Prince of Wales and IMust have some private conference, but be near at hand,For we shall presently have need of you.Exeunt LordsI know not whether God will have it so,For some displeasing service I have done,That, in his secret doom, out of my bloodHe'll breed revengement and a scourge for me,But thou dost in thy passages of lifeMake me believe that thou art only mark'dFor the hot vengeance and the rod of heavenTo punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,Could such inordinate and low desires,Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,Such barren pleasures, rude society,As thou art match'd withal and grafted to,Accompany the greatness of thy bloodAnd hold their level with thy princely heart?So please your majesty, I would I couldQuit all offences with as clear excuseAs well as I am doubtless I can purgeMyself of many I am charged withal:Yet such extenuation let me beg,As, in reproof of many tales devised,which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear,By smiling pick-thanks and base news-mongers,I may, for some things true, wherein my youthHath faulty wander'd and irregular,Find pardon on my true submission.God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry,At thy affections, which do hold a wingQuite from the flight of all thy ancestors.Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost.Which by thy younger brother is supplied,And art almost an alien to the heartsOf all the court and princes of my blood:The hope and expectation of thy timeIs ruin'd, and the soul of every manProphetically doth forethink thy fall.Had I so lavish of my presence been,So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,So stale and cheap to vulgar company,Opinion, that did help me to the crown,Had still kept loyal to possessionAnd left me in reputeless banishment,A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.By being seldom seen, I could not stirBut like a comet I was wonder'd at,That men would tell their children 'This is he,'Others would say 'Where, which is Bolingbroke?'And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,And dress'd myself in such humilityThat I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,Even in the presence of the crowned king.Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,My presence, like a robe pontifical,Ne'er seen but wonder'd at: and so my state,Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feastAnd won by rareness such solemnity.The skipping king, he ambled up and downWith shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,Soon kindled and soon burnt, carded his state,Mingled his royalty with capering fools,Had his great name profaned with their scornsAnd gave his countenance, against his name,To laugh at gibing boys and stand the pushOf every beardless vain comparative,Grew a companion to the common streets,Enfeoff'd himself to popularity,That, being daily swallow'd by men's eyes,They surfeited with honey and beganTo loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a littleMore than a little is by much too much.So when he had occasion to be seen,He was but as the cuckoo is in June,Heard, not regarded, seen, but with such eyesAs, sick and blunted with community,Afford no extraordinary gaze,Such as is bent on sun-like majestyWhen it shines seldom in admiring eyes,But rather drowzed and hung their eyelids down,Slept in his face and render'd such aspectAs cloudy men use to their adversaries,Being with his presence glutted, gorged and full.And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,For thou has lost thy princely privilegeWith vile participation: not an eyeBut is a-weary of thy common sight,Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more,Which now doth that I would not have it do,Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,Be more myself.For all the worldAs thou art to this hour was Richard thenWhen I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,And even as I was then is Percy now.Now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot,He hath more worthy interest to the stateThan thou the shadow of succession,For of no right, nor colour like to right,He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,And, being no more in debt to years than thou,Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops onTo bloody battles and to bruising arms.What never-dying honour hath he gotAgainst renowned Douglas! whose high deeds,Whose hot incursions and great name in armsHolds from all soldiers chief majorityAnd military title capitalThrough all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ:Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes,This infant warrior, in his enterprisesDiscomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,Enlarged him and made a friend of him,To fill the mouth of deep defiance upAnd shake the peace and safety of our throne.And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,The Archbishop's grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,Capitulate against us and are up.But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,Which art my near'st and dearest enemy?Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,Base inclination and the start of spleenTo fight against me under Percy's pay,To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns,To show how much thou art degenerate.Do not think so, you shall not find it so:And God forgive them that so much have sway'dYour majesty's good thoughts away from me!I will redeem all this on Percy's headAnd in the closing of some glorious dayBe bold to tell you that I am your son,When I will wear a garment all of bloodAnd stain my favours in a bloody mask,Which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it:And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,That this same child of honour and renown,This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.For every honour sitting on his helm,Would they were multitudes, and on my headMy shames redoubled! for the time will come,That I shall make this northern youth exchangeHis glorious deeds for my indignities.Percy is but my factor, good my lord,To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf,And I will call him to so strict account,That he shall render every glory up,Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.This, in the name of God, I promise here:The which if He be pleased I shall perform,I do beseech your majesty may salveThe long-grown wounds of my intemperance:If not, the end of life cancels all bands,And I will die a hundred thousand deathsEre break the smallest parcel of this vow.A hundred thousand rebels die in this:Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.Enter BLUNTHow now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.So hath the business that I come to speak of.Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent wordThat Douglas and the English rebels metThe eleventh of this month at ShrewsburyA mighty and a fearful head they are,If promises be kept on every hand,As ever offer'd foul play in the state.The Earl of Westmoreland set forth to-day,With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster,For this advertisement is five days old:On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward,On Thursday we ourselves will march: our meetingIs Bridgenorth: and, Harry, you shall marchThrough Gloucestershire, by which account,Our business valued, some twelve days henceOur general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.Our hands are full of business: let's away,Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.ExeuntEastcheap. The Boar's-Head Tavern.Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPHBardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this lastaction? do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why myskin hangs about me like an like an old lady's loosegown, I am withered like an old apple-john. Well,I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in someliking, I shall be out of heart shortly, and then Ishall have no strength to repent. An I have notforgotten what the inside of a church is made of, Iam a peppercorn, a brewer's horse: the inside of achurch! Company, villanous company, hath been thespoil of me.Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.Why, there is it: come sing me a bawdy song, makeme merry. I was as virtuously given as a gentlemanneed to be, virtuous enough, swore little, diced notabove seven times a week, went to a bawdy-house oncein a quarter--of an hour, paid money that Iborrowed, three of four times, lived well and ingood compass: and now I live out of all order, outof all compass.Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needsbe out of all compass, out of all reasonablecompass, Sir John.Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life:thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern inthe poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee, thou art theKnight of the Burning Lamp.Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.No, I'll be sworn, I make as good use of it as manya man doth of a Death's-head or a memento mori: Inever see thy face but I think upon hell-fire andDives that lived in purple, for there he is in hisrobes, burning, burning. If thou wert any waygiven to virtue, I would swear by thy face, my oathshould be 'By this fire, that's God's angel:' butthou art altogether given over, and wert indeed, butfor the light in thy face, the son of utterdarkness. When thou rannest up Gadshill in thenight to catch my horse, if I did not think thouhadst been an ignis fatuus or a ball of wildfire,there's no purchase in money. O, thou art aperpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light!Thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links andtorches, walking with thee in the night betwixttavern and tavern: but the sack that thou hastdrunk me would have bought me lights as good cheapat the dearest chandler's in Europe. I havemaintained that salamander of yours with fire anytime this two and thirty years, God reward me forit!'Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!God-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heart-burned.Enter HostessHow now, Dame Partlet the hen! have you inquiredyet who picked my pocket?Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? do youthink I keep thieves in my house? I have searched,I have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boyby boy, servant by servant: the tithe of a hairwas never lost in my house before.Ye lie, hostess: Bardolph was shaved and lost manya hair, and I'll be sworn my pocket was picked. Goto, you are a woman, go.Who, I? no, I defy thee: God's light, I was nevercalled so in mine own house before.Go to, I know you well enough.No, Sir John, You do not know me, Sir John. I knowyou, Sir John: you owe me money, Sir John, and nowyou pick a quarrel to beguile me of it: I boughtyou a dozen of shirts to your back.Dowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away tobakers' wives, and they have made bolters of them.Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eightshillings an ell. You owe money here besides, SirJohn, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lentyou, four and twenty pound.He had his part of it, let him pay.He? alas, he is poor, he hath nothing.How! poor? look upon his face, what call you rich?let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks:Ill not pay a denier. What, will you make a younkerof me? shall I not take mine case in mine inn but Ishall have my pocket picked? I have lost aseal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.O Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him, I know nothow oft, that ring was copper!How! the prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup: 'sblood, anhe were here, I would cudgel him like a dog, if hewould say so.Enter PRINCE HENRY and PETO, marching, and FALSTAFF meets them playing on his truncheon like a lifeHow now, lad! is the wind in that door, i' faith?must we all march?Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.My lord, I pray you, hear me.What sayest thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thyhusband? I love him well, he is an honest man.Good my lord, hear me.Prithee, let her alone, and list to me.What sayest thou, Jack?The other night I fell asleep here behind the arrasand had my pocket picked: this house is turnedbawdy-house, they pick pockets.What didst thou lose, Jack?Wilt thou believe me, Hal? three or four bonds offorty pound apiece, and a seal-ring of mygrandfather's.A trifle, some eight-penny matter.So I told him, my lord, and I said I heard yourgrace say so: and, my lord, he speaks most vilelyof you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is, and saidhe would cudgel you.What! he did not?There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.There's no more faith in thee than in a stewedprune, nor no more truth in thee than in a drawnfox, and for womanhood, Maid Marian may be thedeputy's wife of the ward to thee. Go, you thing,goSay, what thing? what thing?What thing! why, a thing to thank God on.I am no thing to thank God on, I would thoushouldst know it, I am an honest man's wife: and,setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave tocall me so.Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to sayotherwise.Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?What beast! why, an otter.An otter, Sir John! Why an otter?Why, she's neither fish nor flesh, a man knows notwhere to have her.Thou art an unjust man in saying so: thou or anyman knows where to have me, thou knave, thou!Thou sayest true, hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.So he doth you, my lord, and said this other day youought him a thousand pound.Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?A thousand pound, Ha! a million: thy love is wortha million: thou owest me thy love.Nay, my lord, he called you Jack, and said he wouldcudgel you.Did I, Bardolph?Indeed, Sir John, you said so.Yea, if he said my ring was copper.I say 'tis copper: darest thou be as good as thy word now?Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare:but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I fear theroaring of a lion's whelp.And why not as the lion?The king is to be feared as the lion: dost thouthink I'll fear thee as I fear thy father? nay, anI do, I pray God my girdle break.O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thyknees! But, sirrah, there's no room for faith,truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine, it is allfilled up with guts and midriff. Charge an honestwoman with picking thy pocket! why, thou whoreson,impudent, embossed rascal, if there were anything inthy pocket but tavern-reckonings, memorandums ofbawdy-houses, and one poor penny-worth ofsugar-candy to make thee long-winded, if thy pocketwere enriched with any other injuries but these, Iam a villain: and yet you will stand to if, you willnot pocket up wrong: art thou not ashamed?Dost thou hear, Hal? thou knowest in the state ofinnocency Adam fell, and what should poor JackFalstaff do in the days of villany? Thou seest Ihave more flesh than another man, and therefore morefrailty. You confess then, you picked my pocket?It appears so by the story.Hostess, I forgive thee: go, make ready breakfast,love thy husband, look to thy servants, cherish thyguests: thou shalt find me tractable to any honestreason: thou seest I am pacified still. Nay,prithee, be gone.Exit HostessNow Hal, to the news at court: for the robbery,lad, how is that answered?O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel tothee: the money is paid back again.O, I do not like that paying back, 'tis a double labour.I am good friends with my father and may do any thing.Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, anddo it with unwashed hands too.Do, my lord.I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.I would it had been of horse. Where shall I findone that can steal well? O for a fine thief, of theage of two and twenty or thereabouts! I amheinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked forthese rebels, they offend none but the virtuous: Ilaud them, I praise them.Bardolph!My lord?Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster, to mybrother John, this to my Lord of Westmoreland.Exit BardolphGo, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I havethirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.Exit PetoJack, meet me to-morrow in the temple hall at twoo'clock in the afternoon.There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receiveMoney and order for their furniture.The land is burning, Percy stands on high,And either we or they must lower lie.Exit PRINCE HENRYRare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come!O, I could wish this tavern were my drum!ExitACT IVSCENE I. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, and DOUGLASWell said, my noble Scot: if speaking truthIn this fine age were not thought flattery,Such attribution should the Douglas have,As not a soldier of this season's stampShould go so general current through the world.By God, I cannot flatter, I do defyThe tongues of soothers, but a braver placeIn my heart's love hath no man than yourself:Nay, task me to my word, approve me, lord.Thou art the king of honour:No man so potent breathes upon the groundBut I will beard him.Do so, and 'tis well.Enter a Messenger with lettersWhat letters hast thou there?--I can but thank you.These letters come from your father.Letters from him! why comes he not himself?He cannot come, my lord, he is grievous sick.'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sickIn such a rustling time? Who leads his power?Under whose government come they along?His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,And at the time of my departure thenceHe was much fear'd by his physicians.I would the state of time had first been wholeEre he by sickness had been visited:His health was never better worth than now.Sick now! droop now! this sickness doth infectThe very life-blood of our enterprise,'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.He writes me here, that inward sickness--And that his friends by deputation could notSo soon be drawn, nor did he think it meetTo lay so dangerous and dear a trustOn any soul removed but on his own.Yet doth he give us bold advertisement,That with our small conjunction we should on,To see how fortune is disposed to us,For, as he writes, there is no quailing now.Because the king is certainly possess'dOf all our purposes. What say you to it?Your father's sickness is a maim to us.A perilous gash, a very limb lopp'd off:And yet, in faith, it is not, his present wantSeems more than we shall find it: were it goodTo set the exact wealth of all our statesAll at one cast? to set so rich a mainOn the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?It were not good, for therein should we readThe very bottom and the soul of hope,The very list, the very utmost boundOf all our fortunes.'Faith, and so we should,Where now remains a sweet reversion:We may boldly spend upon the hope of whatIs to come in:A comfort of retirement lives in this.A rendezvous, a home to fly unto.If that the devil and mischance look bigUpon the maidenhead of our affairs.But yet I would your father had been here.The quality and hair of our attemptBrooks no division: it will be thoughtBy some, that know not why he is away,That wisdom, loyalty and mere dislikeOf our proceedings kept the earl from hence:And think how such an apprehensionMay turn the tide of fearful factionAnd breed a kind of question in our cause,For well you know we of the offering sideMust keep aloof from strict arbitrement,And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whenceThe eye of reason may pry in upon us:This absence of your father's draws a curtain,That shows the ignorant a kind of fearBefore not dreamt of.You strain too far.I rather of his absence make this use:It lends a lustre and more great opinion,A larger dare to our great enterprise,Than if the earl were here, for men must think,If we without his help can make a headTo push against a kingdom, with his helpWe shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.As heart can think: there is not such a wordSpoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.Enter SIR RICHARD VERNONMy cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.No harm: what more?And further, I have learn'd,The king himself in person is set forth,Or hitherwards intended speedily,With strong and mighty preparation.He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,And his comrades, that daff'd the world aside,And bid it pass?All furnish'd, all in arms,All plumed like estridges that with the windBaited like eagles having lately bathed,Glittering in golden coats, like images,As full of spirit as the month of May,And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer,Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm'dRise from the ground like feather'd Mercury,And vaulted with such ease into his seat,As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds,To turn and wind a fiery PegasusAnd witch the world with noble horsemanship.No more, no more: worse than the sun in March,This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come:They come like sacrifices in their trim,And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky warAll hot and bleeding will we offer them:The mailed Mars shall on his altar sitUp to the ears in blood. I am on fireTo hear this rich reprisal is so nighAnd yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse,Who is to bear me like a thunderboltAgainst the bosom of the Prince of Wales:Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.O that Glendower were come!There is more news:I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along,He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.What may the king's whole battle reach unto?To thirty thousand.Forty let it be:My father and Glendower being both away,The powers of us may serve so great a dayCome, let us take a muster speedily:Doomsday is near, die all, die merrily.Talk not of dying: I am out of fearOf death or death's hand for this one-half year.ExeuntSCENE II. A public road near Coventry.Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPHBardolph, get thee before to Coventry, fill me abottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through,we'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight.Will you give me money, captain?Lay out, lay out.This bottle makes an angel.An if it do, take it for thy labour, and if it maketwenty, take them all, I'll answer the coinage. Bidmy lieutenant Peto meet me at town's end.I will, captain: farewell.ExitIf I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a sousedgurnet. I have misused the king's press damnably.I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fiftysoldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press menone but good house-holders, yeoman's sons, inquireme out contracted bachelors, such as had been askedtwice on the banns, such a commodity of warm slaves,as had as lieve hear the devil as a drum, such asfear the report of a caliver worse than a struckfowl or a hurt wild-duck. I pressed me none but suchtoasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies nobigger than pins' heads, and they have bought outtheir services, and now my whole charge consists ofancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen ofcompanies, slaves as ragged as Lazarus in thepainted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked hissores, and such as indeed were never soldiers, butdiscarded unjust serving-men, younger sons toyounger brothers, revolted tapsters and ostlerstrade-fallen, the cankers of a calm world and along peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged thanan old faced ancient: and such have I, to fill upthe rooms of them that have bought out theirservices, that you would think that I had a hundredand fifty tattered prodigals lately come fromswine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A madfellow met me on the way and told me I had unloadedall the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eyehath seen such scarecrows. I'll not march throughCoventry with them, that's flat: nay, and thevillains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they hadgyves on, for indeed I had the most of them out ofprison. There's but a shirt and a half in all mycompany, and the half shirt is two napkins tackedtogether and thrown over the shoulders like anherald's coat without sleeves, and the shirt, to saythe truth, stolen from my host at Saint Alban's, orthe red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that's allone, they'll find linen enough on every hedge.Enter the PRINCE and WESTMORELANDHow now, blown Jack! how now, quilt!What, Hal! how now, mad wag! what a devil dost thouin Warwickshire? My good Lord of Westmoreland, Icry you mercy: I thought your honour had already beenat Shrewsbury.Faith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I werethere, and you too, but my powers are there already.The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we mustaway all night.Tut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat tosteal cream.I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hathalready made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whosefellows are these that come after?Mine, Hal, mine.I did never see such pitiful rascals.Tut, tut, good enough to toss, food for powder, foodfor powder, they'll fill a pit as well as better:tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poorand bare, too beggarly.'Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they hadthat, and for their bareness, I am sure they neverlearned that of me.No I'll be sworn, unless you call three fingers onthe ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste: Percy isalready in the field.What, is the king encamped?He is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long.Well,To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feastFits a dull fighter and a keen guest.ExeuntSCENE III. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, DOUGLAS, and VERNONWe'll fight with him to-night.It may not be.You give him then the advantage.Not a whit.Why say you so? looks he not for supply?So do we.His is certain, ours is doubtful.Good cousin, be advised, stir not tonight.Do not, my lord.You do not counsel well:You speak it out of fear and cold heart.Do me no slander, Douglas: by my life,And I dare well maintain it with my life,If well-respected honour bid me on,I hold as little counsel with weak fearAs you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives:Let it be seen to-morrow in the battleWhich of us fears.Yea, or to-night.Content.To-night, say I.Come, come it nay not be. I wonder much,Being men of such great leading as you are,That you foresee not what impedimentsDrag back our expedition: certain horseOf my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up:Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today,And now their pride and mettle is asleep,Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,That not a horse is half the half of himself.So are the horses of the enemyIn general, journey-bated and brought low:The better part of ours are full of rest.The number of the king exceedeth ours:For God's sake. cousin, stay till all come in.The trumpet sounds a parleyEnter SIR WALTER BLUNTI come with gracious offers from the king,if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt, and would to GodYou were of our determination!Some of us love you well, and even those someEnvy your great deservings and good name,Because you are not of our quality,But stand against us like an enemy.And God defend but still I should stand so,So long as out of limit and true ruleYou stand against anointed majesty.But to my charge. The king hath sent to knowThe nature of your griefs, and whereuponYou conjure from the breast of civil peaceSuch bold hostility, teaching his duteous landAudacious cruelty. If that the kingHave any way your good deserts forgot,Which he confesseth to be manifold,He bids you name your griefs, and with all speedYou shall have your desires with interestAnd pardon absolute for yourself and theseHerein misled by your suggestion.The king is kind, and well we know the kingKnows at what time to promise, when to pay.My father and my uncle and myselfDid give him that same royalty he wears,And when he was not six and twenty strong,Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,My father gave him welcome to the shore,And when he heard him swear and vow to GodHe came but to be Duke of Lancaster,To sue his livery and beg his peace,With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,My father, in kind heart and pity moved,Swore him assistance and perform'd it too.Now when the lords and barons of the realmPerceived Northumberland did lean to him,The more and less came in with cap and knee,Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,Gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd himEven at the heels in golden multitudes.He presently, as greatness knows itself,Steps me a little higher than his vowMade to my father, while his blood was poor,Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh,And now, forsooth, takes on him to reformSome certain edicts and some strait decreesThat lie too heavy on the commonwealth,Cries out upon abuses, seems to weepOver his country's wrongs, and by this face,This seeming brow of justice, did he winThe hearts of all that he did angle for,Proceeded further, cut me off the headsOf all the favourites that the absent kingIn deputation left behind him here,When he was personal in the Irish war.Tut, I came not to hear this.Then to the point.In short time after, he deposed the king,Soon after that, deprived him of his life,And in the neck of that, task'd the whole state:To make that worse, suffer'd his kinsman March,Who is, if every owner were well placed,Indeed his king, to be engaged in Wales,There without ransom to lie forfeited,Disgraced me in my happy victories,Sought to entrap me by intelligence,Rated mine uncle from the council-board,In rage dismiss'd my father from the court,Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,And in conclusion drove us to seek outThis head of safety, and withal to pryInto his title, the which we findToo indirect for long continuance.Shall I return this answer to the king?Not so, Sir Walter: we'll withdraw awhile.Go to the king, and let there be impawn'dSome surety for a safe return again,And in the morning early shall my uncleBring him our purposes: and so farewell.I would you would accept of grace and love.And may be so we shall.Pray God you do.ExeuntSCENE IV. York. The ARCHBISHOP'S palace.Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK and SIR MICHAELHie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealed briefWith winged haste to the lord marshal,This to my cousin Scroop, and all the restTo whom they are directed. If you knewHow much they do to import, you would make haste.My good lord,I guess their tenor.Like enough you do.To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a dayWherein the fortune of ten thousand menMust bide the touch, for, sir, at Shrewsbury,As I am truly given to understand,The king with mighty and quick-raised powerMeets with Lord Harry: and, I fear, Sir Michael,What with the sickness of Northumberland,Whose power was in the first proportion,And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,Who with them was a rated sinew tooAnd comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies,I fear the power of Percy is too weakTo wage an instant trial with the king.Why, my good lord, you need not fear,There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.No, Mortimer is not there.But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,And there is my Lord of Worcester and a headOf gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.And so there is: but yet the king hath drawnThe special head of all the land together:The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,The noble Westmoreland and warlike Blunt,And moe corrivals and dear menOf estimation and command in arms.Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear,And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed:For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the kingDismiss his power, he means to visit us,For he hath heard of our confederacy,And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him:Therefore make haste. I must go write againTo other friends, and so farewell, Sir Michael.ExeuntACT VSCENE I. KING HENRY IV's camp near Shrewsbury.Enter KING HENRY, PRINCE HENRY, Lord John of  LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and FALSTAFFHow bloodily the sun begins to peerAbove yon busky hill! the day looks paleAt his distemperature.The southern windDoth play the trumpet to his purposes,And by his hollow whistling in the leavesForetells a tempest and a blustering day.Then with the losers let it sympathize,For nothing can seem foul to those that win.The trumpet soundsEnter WORCESTER and VERNONHow now, my Lord of Worcester! 'tis not wellThat you and I should meet upon such termsAs now we meet. You have deceived our trust,And made us doff our easy robes of peace,To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel:This is not well, my lord, this is not well.What say you to it? will you again unknitThis curlish knot of all-abhorred war?And move in that obedient orb againWhere you did give a fair and natural light,And be no more an exhaled meteor,A prodigy of fear and a portentOf broached mischief to the unborn times?Hear me, my liege:For mine own part, I could be well contentTo entertain the lag-end of my lifeWith quiet hours, for I do protest,I have not sought the day of this dislike.You have not sought it! how comes it, then?Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.Peace, chewet, peace!It pleased your majesty to turn your looksOf favour from myself and all our house,And yet I must remember you, my lord,We were the first and dearest of your friends.For you my staff of office did I breakIn Richard's time, and posted day and nightto meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,When yet you were in place and in accountNothing so strong and fortunate as I.It was myself, my brother and his son,That brought you home and boldly did outdareThe dangers of the time. You swore to us,And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster:To this we swore our aid. But in short spaceIt rain'd down fortune showering on your head,And such a flood of greatness fell on you,What with our help, what with the absent king,What with the injuries of a wanton time,The seeming sufferances that you had borne,And the contrarious winds that held the kingSo long in his unlucky Irish warsThat all in England did repute him dead:And from this swarm of fair advantagesYou took occasion to be quickly woo'dTo gripe the general sway into your hand,Forget your oath to us at Doncaster,And being fed by us you used us soAs that ungentle hull, the cuckoo's bird,Useth the sparrow, did oppress our nest,Grew by our feeding to so great a bulkThat even our love durst not come near your sightFor fear of swallowing, but with nimble wingWe were enforced, for safety sake, to flyOut of sight and raise this present head,Whereby we stand opposed by such meansAs you yourself have forged against yourselfBy unkind usage, dangerous countenance,And violation of all faith and trothSworn to us in your younger enterprise.These things indeed you have articulate,Proclaim'd at market-crosses, read in churches,To face the garment of rebellionWith some fine colour that may please the eyeOf fickle changelings and poor discontents,Which gape and rub the elbow at the newsOf hurlyburly innovation:And never yet did insurrection wantSuch water-colours to impaint his cause,Nor moody beggars, starving for a timeOf pellmell havoc and confusion.In both your armies there is many a soulShall pay full dearly for this encounter,If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,The Prince of Wales doth join with all the worldIn praise of Henry Percy: by my hopes,This present enterprise set off his head,I do not think a braver gentleman,More active-valiant or more valiant-young,More daring or more bold, is now aliveTo grace this latter age with noble deeds.For my part, I may speak it to my shame,I have a truant been to chivalry,And so I hear he doth account me too,Yet this before my father's majesty--I am content that he shall take the oddsOf his great name and estimation,And will, to save the blood on either side,Try fortune with him in a single fight.And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,Albeit considerations infiniteDo make against it. No, good Worcester, no,We love our people well, even those we loveThat are misled upon your cousin's part,And, will they take the offer of our grace,Both he and they and you, every manShall be my friend again and I'll be his:So tell your cousin, and bring me wordWhat he will do: but if he will not yield,Rebuke and dread correction wait on usAnd they shall do their office. So, be gone,We will not now be troubled with reply:We offer fair, take it advisedly.Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNONIt will not be accepted, on my life:The Douglas and the Hotspur both togetherAre confident against the world in arms.Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge,For, on their answer, will we set on them:And God befriend us, as our cause is just!Exeunt all but PRINCE HENRY and FALSTAFFHal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestrideme, so, 'tis a point of friendship.Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.Say thy prayers, and farewell.I  would 'twere bed-time, Hal, and all well.Why, thou owest God a death.Exit PRINCE HENRY'Tis not due yet, I would be loath to pay him beforehis day. What need I be so forward with him thatcalls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter, honour pricksme on. Yea, but how if honour prick me off when Icome on? how then? Can honour set to a leg? no: oran arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no.Honour hath no skill in surgery, then? no. What ishonour? a word. What is in that word honour? whatis that honour? air. A trim reckoning! Who hath it?he that died o' Wednesday. Doth he feel it? no.Doth he hear it? no. 'Tis insensible, then. Yea,to the dead. But will it not live with the living?no. Why? detraction will not suffer it. ThereforeI'll none of it. Honour is a mere scutcheon: and soends my catechism.ExitSCENE II. The rebel camp.Enter WORCESTER and VERNONO, no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,The liberal and kind offer of the king.'Twere best he did.Then are we all undone.It is not possible, it cannot be,The king should keep his word in loving us,He will suspect us still and find a timeTo punish this offence in other faults:Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes,For treason is but trusted like the fox,Who, ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up,Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.Look how we can, or sad or merrily,Interpretation will misquote our looks,And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,The better cherish'd, still the nearer death.My nephew's trespass may be well forgot,it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,And an adopted name of privilege,A hair-brain'd Hotspur, govern'd by a spleen:All his offences live upon my headAnd on his father's, we did train him on,And, his corruption being ta'en from us,We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,In any case, the offer of the king.Deliver what you will, I'll say 'tis so.Here comes your cousin.Enter HOTSPUR and DOUGLASMy uncle is return'd:Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.Uncle, what news?The king will bid you battle presently.Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.Marry, and shall, and very willingly.ExitThere is no seeming mercy in the king.Did you beg any? God forbid!I told him gently of our grievances,Of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus,By now forswearing that he is forsworn:He calls us rebels, traitors, and will scourgeWith haughty arms this hateful name in us.Re-enter the EARL OF DOUGLASArm, gentlemen, to arms! for I have thrownA brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it,Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king,And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,And that no man might draw short breath todayBut I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,How show'd his tasking? seem'd it in contempt?No, by my soul, I never in my lifeDid hear a challenge urged more modestly,Unless a brother should a brother dareTo gentle exercise and proof of arms.He gave you all the duties of a man,Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue,Spoke to your deservings like a chronicle,Making you ever better than his praiseBy still dispraising praise valued in you,And, which became him like a prince indeed,He made a blushing cital of himself,And chid his truant youth with such a graceAs if he master'd there a double spirit.Of teaching and of learning instantly.There did he pause: but let me tell the world,If he outlive the envy of this day,England did never owe so sweet a hope,So much misconstrued in his wantonness.Cousin, I think thou art enamouredOn his follies: never did I hearOf any prince so wild a libertine.But be he as he will, yet once ere nightI will embrace him with a soldier's arm,That he shall shrink under my courtesy.Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends,Better consider what you have to doThan I, that have not well the gift of tongue,Can lift your blood up with persuasion.Enter a MessengerMy lord, here are letters for you.I cannot read them now.O gentlemen, the time of life is short!To spend that shortness basely were too long,If life did ride upon a dial's point,Still ending at the arrival of an hour.An if we live, we live to tread on kings,If die, brave death, when princes die with us!Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair,When the intent of bearing them is just.Enter another MessengerMy lord, prepare, the king comes on apace.I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale,For I profess not talking, only this--Let each man do his best: and here draw IA sword, whose temper I intend to stainWith the best blood that I can meet withalIn the adventure of this perilous day.Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on.Sound all the lofty instruments of war,And by that music let us all embrace,For, heaven to earth, some of us never shallA second time do such a courtesy.The trumpets sound. They embrace, and exeuntSCENE III. Plain between the camps.KING HENRY enters with his power. Alarum to the battle. Then enter DOUGLAS and SIR WALTER BLUNTWhat is thy name, that in the battle thusThou crossest me? what honour dost thou seekUpon my head?Know then, my name is Douglas,And I do haunt thee in the battle thusBecause some tell me that thou art a king.They tell thee true.The Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath boughtThy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry,This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee,Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot,And thou shalt find a king that will revengeLord Stafford's death.They fight. DOUGLAS kills SIR WALTER BLUNT. Enter HOTSPURO Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,never had triumph'd upon a Scot.All's done, all's won, here breathless lies the king.Where?Here.This, Douglas? no: I know this face full well:A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt,Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!A borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear:Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?The king hath many marching in his coats.Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats,I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,Until I meet the king.Up, and away!Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.ExeuntAlarum. Enter FALSTAFF, solusThough I could 'scape shot-free at London, I fearthe shot here, here's no scoring but upon the pate.Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there's honourfor you! here's no vanity! I am as hot as moultenlead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me! Ineed no more weight than mine own bowels. I haveled my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there'snot three of my hundred and fifty left alive, andthey are for the town's end, to beg during life.But who comes here?Enter PRINCE HENRYWhat, stand'st thou idle here? lend me thy sword:Many a nobleman lies stark and stiffUnder the hoofs of vaunting enemies,Whose deaths are yet unrevenged: I prithee,lend me thy sword.O Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile.Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I havedone this day. I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.He is, indeed, and living to kill thee. I prithee,lend me thy sword.Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'stnot my sword, but take my pistol, if thou wilt.Give it to me: what, is it in the case?Ay, Hal, 'tis hot, 'tis hot, there's that will sack a city.PRINCE HENRY draws it out, and finds it to be a bottle of sackWhat, is it a time to jest and dally now?He throws the bottle at him. ExitWell, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him. If he docome in my way, so: if he do not, if I come in hiswillingly, let him make a carbonado of me. I likenot such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: give melife: which if I can save, so, if not, honour comesunlooked for, and there's an end.Exit FALSTAFFSCENE IV. Another part of the field.Alarum. Excursions. Enter PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, and EARL OF WESTMORELANDI prithee,Harry, withdraw thyself, thou bleed'st too much.Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.I beseech your majesty, make up,Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.I will do so.My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help:And God forbid a shallow scratch should driveThe Prince of Wales from such a field as this,Where stain'd nobility lies trodden on,and rebels' arms triumph in massacres!We breathe too long: come, cousin Westmoreland,Our duty this way lies, for God's sake come.Exeunt LANCASTER and WESTMORELANDBy God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster,I did not think thee lord of such a spirit:Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,But now, I do respect thee as my soul.I saw him hold Lord Percy at the pointWith lustier maintenance than I did look forOf such an ungrown warrior.O, this boyLends mettle to us all!ExitEnter DOUGLASAnother king! they grow like Hydra's heads:I am the Douglas, fatal to all thoseThat wear those colours on them: what art thou,That counterfeit'st the person of a king?The king himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heartSo many of his shadows thou hast metAnd not the very king. I have two boysSeek Percy and thyself about the field:But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,I will assay thee: so, defend thyself.I fear thou art another counterfeit,And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king:But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,And thus I win thee.They fight. KING HENRY being in danger, PRINCE HENRY entersHold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art likeNever to hold it up again! the spiritsOf valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms:It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,Who never promiseth but he means to pay.They fight: DOUGLAS fliesCheerly, my lord	how fares your grace?Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight.Stay, and breathe awhile:Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion,And show'd thou makest some tender of my life,In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.O God! they did me too much injuryThat ever said I hearken'd for your death.If it were so, I might have let aloneThe insulting hand of Douglas over you,Which would have been as speedy in your endAs all the poisonous potions in the worldAnd saved the treacherous labour of your son.Make up to Clifton: I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.ExitEnter HOTSPURIf I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.My name is Harry Percy.Why, then I seeA very valiant rebel of the name.I am the Prince of Wales, and think not, Percy,To share with me in glory any more:Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,Nor can one England brook a double reign,Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.Nor shall it, Harry, for the hour is comeTo end the one of us, and would to GodThy name in arms were now as great as mine!I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,And all the budding honours on thy crestI'll crop, to make a garland for my head.I can no longer brook thy vanities.They fightEnter FALSTAFFWell said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find noboy's play here, I can tell you.Re-enter DOUGLAS, he fights with FALSTAFF,  who falls down as if he were dead, and exit DOUGLAS. HOTSPUR is wounded, and fallsO, Harry, thou hast robb'd me of my youth!I better brook the loss of brittle lifeThan those proud titles thou hast won of me,They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh:But thought's the slave of life, and life time's fool,And time, that takes survey of all the world,Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,But that the earthy and cold hand of deathLies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dustAnd food for--DiesFor worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart!Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!When that this body did contain a spirit,A kingdom for it was too small a bound,But now two paces of the vilest earthIs room enough: this earth that bears thee deadBears not alive so stout a gentleman.If thou wert sensible of courtesy,I should not make so dear a show of zeal:But let my favours hide thy mangled face,And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myselfFor doing these fair rites of tenderness.Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,But not remember'd in thy epitaph!He spieth FALSTAFF on the groundWhat, old acquaintance! could not all this fleshKeep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!I could have better spared a better man:O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,If I were much in love with vanity!Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.Embowell'd will I see thee by and by:Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.Exit PRINCE HENRY[Rising up]  Embowelled! if thou embowel me to-day,I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me tooto-morrow. 'Sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, orthat hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too.Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit: to die,is to be a counterfeit, for he is but thecounterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man:but to counterfeit dying, when a man therebyliveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true andperfect image of life indeed. The better part ofvalour is discretion, in the which better part Ihave saved my life.'Zounds, I am afraid of thisgunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if heshould counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, I amafraid he would prove the better counterfeit.Therefore I'll make him sure, yea, and I'll swear Ikilled him. Why may not he rise as well as I?Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.Therefore, sirrah,Stabbing himwith a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.Takes up HOTSPUR on his backRe-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTERCome, brother John, full bravely hast thou flesh'dThy maiden sword.But, soft! whom have we here?Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?I did, I saw him dead,Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Artthou alive?Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?I prithee, speak, we will not trust our eyesWithout our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st.No, that's certain, I am not a double man: but if Ibe not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy:Throwing the body downif your father will do me any honour, so, if not, lethim kill the next Percy himself. I look to be eitherearl or duke, I can assure you.Why, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given tolying! I grant you I was down and out of breath,and so was he: but we rose both at an instant andfought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may bebelieved, so, if not, let them that should rewardvalour bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll takeit upon my death, I gave him this wound in thethigh: if the man were alive and would deny it,'zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.This is the strangest fellow, brother John.Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back:For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.A retreat is soundedThe trumpet sounds retreat, the day is ours.Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,To see what friends are living, who are dead.Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and LANCASTERI'll follow, as they say, for reward. He thatrewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great,I'll grow less, for I'll purge, and leave sack, andlive cleanly as a nobleman should do.ExitSCENE V. Another part of the field.The trumpets sound. Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE  HENRY, LORD JOHN LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, with WORCESTER and VERNON prisonersThus ever did rebellion find rebuke.Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace,Pardon and terms of love to all of you?And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?Three knights upon our party slain to-day,A noble earl and many a creature elseHad been alive this hour,If like a Christian thou hadst truly borneBetwixt our armies true intelligence.What I have done my safety urged me to,And I embrace this fortune patiently,Since not to be avoided it falls on me.Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too:Other offenders we will pause upon.Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON, guardedHow goes the field?The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he sawThe fortune of the day quite turn'd from him,The noble Percy slain, and all his menUpon the foot of fear, fled with the rest,And falling from a hill, he was so bruisedThat the pursuers took him. At my tentThe Douglas is, and I beseech your graceI may dispose of him.With all my heart.Then, brother John of Lancaster, to youThis honourable bounty shall belong:Go to the Douglas, and deliver himUp to his pleasure, ransomless and free:His valour shown upon our crests to-dayHath taught us how to cherish such high deedsEven in the bosom of our adversaries.I thank your grace for this high courtesy,Which I shall give away immediately.Then this remains, that we divide our power.You, son John, and my cousin WestmorelandTowards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,Who, as we hear, are busily in arms:Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,Meeting the cheque of such another day:And since this business so fair is done,Let us not leave till all our own be won.ExeuntACT ISCENE I. Westminster Abbey.Dead March. Enter the Funeral of KING HENRY the  Fifth, attended on by Dukes of BEDFORD, Regent of  France, GLOUCESTER, Protector, and EXETER, Earl of WARWICK, the BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, Heralds,  and cHung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!Comets, importing change of times and states,Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,And with them scourge the bad revolting starsThat have consented unto Henry's death!King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!England ne'er lost a king of so much worth.England ne'er had a king until his time.Virtue he had, deserving to command:His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams:His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings,His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire,More dazzled and drove back his enemiesThan mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech:He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.We mourn in black: why mourn we not in blood?Henry is dead and never shall revive:Upon a wooden coffin we attend,And death's dishonourable victoryWe with our stately presence glorify,Like captives bound to a triumphant car.What! shall we curse the planets of mishapThat plotted thus our glory's overthrow?Or shall we think the subtle-witted FrenchConjurers and sorcerers, that afraid of himBy magic verses have contrived his end?BISHOPHe was a king bless'd of the King of kings.Unto the French the dreadful judgement-daySo dreadful will not be as was his sight.The battles of the Lord of hosts he fought:The church's prayers made him so prosperous.The church! where is it? Had not churchmen pray'd,His thread of life had not so soon decay'd:None do you like but an effeminate prince,Whom, like a school-boy, you may over-awe.BISHOPGloucester, whate'er we like, thou art protectorAnd lookest to command the prince and realm.Thy wife is proud, she holdeth thee in awe,More than God or religious churchmen may.Name not religion, for thou lovest the flesh,And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'stExcept it be to pray against thy foes.Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace:Let's to the altar: heralds, wait on us:Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms:Since arms avail not now that Henry's dead.Posterity, await for wretched years,When at their mothers' moist eyes babes shall suck,Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,And none but women left to wail the dead.Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,Combat with adverse planets in the heavens!A far more glorious star thy soul will makeThan Julius Caesar or bright--Enter a MessengerMy honourable lords, health to you all!Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,Of loss, of slaughter and discomfiture:Guienne, Champagne, Rheims, Orleans,Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse?Speak softly, or the loss of those great townsWill make him burst his lead and rise from death.Is Paris lost? is Rouen yielded up?If Henry were recall'd to life again,These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.How were they lost? what treachery was used?No treachery, but want of men and money.Amongst the soldiers this is muttered,That here you maintain several factions,And whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought,You are disputing of your generals:One would have lingering wars with little cost,Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings,A third thinks, without expense at all,By guileful fair words peace may be obtain'd.Awake, awake, English nobility!Let not sloth dim your horrors new-begot:Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms,Of England's coat one half is cut away.Were our tears wanting to this funeral,These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.Me they concern, Regent I am of France.Give me my steeled coat. I'll fight for France.Away with these disgraceful wailing robes!Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes,To weep their intermissive miseries.Enter to them another MessengerLords, view these letters full of bad mischance.France is revolted from the English quite,Except some petty towns of no import:The Dauphin Charles is crowned king of Rheims,The Bastard of Orleans with him is join'd,Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part,The Duke of Alencon flieth to his side.The Dauphin crowned king! all fly to him!O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?We will not fly, but to our enemies' throats.Bedford, if thou be slack, I'll fight it out.Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness?An army have I muster'd in my thoughts,Wherewith already France is overrun.Enter another MessengerMy gracious lords, to add to your laments,Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse,I must inform you of a dismal fightBetwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.BISHOPWhat! wherein Talbot overcame? is't so?O, no, wherein Lord Talbot was o'erthrown:The circumstance I'll tell you more at large.The tenth of August last this dreadful lord,Retiring from the siege of Orleans,Having full scarce six thousand in his troop.By three and twenty thousand of the FrenchWas round encompassed and set upon.No leisure had he to enrank his men,He wanted pikes to set before his archers,Instead whereof sharp stakes pluck'd out of hedgesThey pitched in the ground confusedly,To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.More than three hours the fight continued,Where valiant Talbot above human thoughtEnacted wonders with his sword and lance:Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him,Here, there, and every where, enraged he flew:The French exclaim'd, the devil was in arms,All the whole army stood agazed on him:His soldiers spying his undaunted spiritA Talbot! a Talbot! cried out amainAnd rush'd into the bowels of the battle.Here had the conquest fully been seal'd up,If Sir John Fastolfe had not play'd the coward:He, being in the vaward, placed behindWith purpose to relieve and follow them,Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.Hence grew the general wreck and massacre,Enclosed were they with their enemies:A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace,Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back,Whom all France with their chief assembled strengthDurst not presume to look once in the face.Is Talbot slain? then I will slay myself,For living idly here in pomp and ease,Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid,Unto his dastard foemen is betray'd.O no, he lives, but is took prisoner,And Lord Scales with him and Lord Hungerford:Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.His ransom there is none but I shall pay:I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne:His crown shall be the ransom of my friend,Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.Farewell, my masters, to my task will I,Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,To keep our great Saint George's feast withal:Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take,Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.So you had need, for Orleans is besieged,The English army is grown weak and faint:The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply,And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn,Either to quell the Dauphin utterly,Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.I do remember it, and here take my leave,To go about my preparation.ExitI'll to the Tower with all the haste I can,To view the artillery and munition,And then I will proclaim young Henry king.ExitTo Eltham will I, where the young king is,Being ordain'd his special governor,And for his safety there I'll best devise.ExitBISHOPEach hath his place and function to attend:I am left out, for me nothing remains.But long I will not be Jack out of office:The king from Eltham I intend to stealAnd sit at chiefest stern of public weal.ExeuntSCENE II. France. Before Orleans.Sound a flourish. Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, marching with drum and SoldiersMars his true moving, even as in the heavensSo in the earth, to this day is not known:Late did he shine upon the English side,Now we are victors, upon us he smiles.What towns of any moment but we have?At pleasure here we lie near Orleans,Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts,Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.They want their porridge and their fat bull-beeves:Either they must be dieted like mulesAnd have their provender tied to their mouthsOr piteous they will look, like drowned mice.Let's raise the siege: why live we idly here?Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear:Remaineth none but mad-brain'd Salisbury,And he may well in fretting spend his gall,Nor men nor money hath he to make war.Sound, sound alarum! we will rush on them.Now for the honour of the forlorn French!Him I forgive my death that killeth meWhen he sees me go back one foot or fly.ExeuntHere alarum, they are beaten back by the English with great loss. Re-enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIERWho ever saw the like? what men have I!Dogs! cowards! dastards! I would ne'er have fled,But that they left me 'midst my enemies.Salisbury is a desperate homicide,He fighteth as one weary of his life.The other lords, like lions wanting food,Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.Froissart, a countryman of ours, records,England all Olivers and Rowlands bred,During the time Edward the Third did reign.More truly now may this be verified,For none but Samsons and GoliasesIt sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!Lean, raw-boned rascals! who would e'er supposeThey had such courage and audacity?Let's leave this town, for they are hare-brain'd slaves,And hunger will enforce them to be more eager:Of old I know them, rather with their teethThe walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.I think, by some odd gimmors or deviceTheir arms are set like clocks, stiff to strike on,Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.By my consent, we'll even let them alone.Be it so.Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANSWhere's the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.Bastard of Orleans, thrice welcome to us.Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appall'd:Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?Be not dismay'd, for succor is at hand:A holy maid hither with me I bring,Which by a vision sent to her from heavenOrdained is to raise this tedious siegeAnd drive the English forth the bounds of France.The spirit of deep prophecy she hath,Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome:What's past and what's to come she can descry.Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words,For they are certain and unfallible.Go, call her in.Exit BASTARD OF ORLEANSBut first, to try her skill,Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place:Question her proudly, let thy looks be stern:By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.Re-enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, with JOAN LA PUCELLEFair maid, is't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?Reignier, is't thou that thinkest to beguile me?Where is the Dauphin? Come, come from behind,I know thee well, though never seen before.Be not amazed, there's nothing hid from me:In private will I talk with thee apart.Stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.She takes upon her bravely at first dash.Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd's daughter,My wit untrain'd in any kind of art.Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleasedTo shine on my contemptible estate:Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,And to sun's parching heat display'd my cheeks,God's mother deigned to appear to meAnd in a vision full of majestyWill'd me to leave my base vocationAnd free my country from calamity:Her aid she promised and assured success:In complete glory she reveal'd herself,And, whereas I was black and swart before,With those clear rays which she infused on meThat beauty am I bless'd with which you see.Ask me what question thou canst possible,And I will answer unpremeditated:My courage try by combat, if thou darest,And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.Resolve on this, thou shalt be fortunate,If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.Thou hast astonish'd me with thy high terms:Only this proof I'll of thy valour make,In single combat thou shalt buckle with me,And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true,Otherwise I renounce all confidence.I am prepared: here is my keen-edged sword,Deck'd with five flower-de-luces on each side,The which at Touraine, in Saint Katharine'schurchyard,Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.Then come, o' God's name, I fear no woman.And while I live, I'll ne'er fly from a man.Here they fight, and JOAN LA PUCELLE overcomesStay, stay thy hands! thou art an AmazonAnd fightest with the sword of Deborah.Christ's mother helps me, else I were too weak.Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me:Impatiently I burn with thy desire,My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,Let me thy servant and not sovereign be:'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.I must not yield to any rites of love,For my profession's sacred from above:When I have chased all thy foes from hence,Then will I think upon a recompense.Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock,Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?He may mean more than we poor men do know:These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.My lord, where are you? what devise you on?Shall we give over Orleans, or no?Why, no, I say, distrustful recreants!Fight till the last gasp, I will be your guard.What she says I'll confirm: we'll fight it out.Assign'd am I to be the English scourge.This night the siege assuredly I'll raise:Expect Saint Martin's summer, halcyon days,Since I have entered into these wars.Glory is like a circle in the water,Which never ceaseth to enlarge itselfTill by broad spreading it disperse to nought.With Henry's death the English circle ends,Dispersed are the glories it included.Now am I like that proud insulting shipWhich Caesar and his fortune bare at once.Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?Thou with an eagle art inspired then.Helen, the mother of great Constantine,Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters, were like thee.Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the earth,How may I reverently worship thee enough?Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours,Drive them from Orleans and be immortalized.Presently we'll try: come, let's away about it:No prophet will I trust, if she prove false.ExeuntSCENE III. London. Before the Tower.Enter GLOUCESTER, with his Serving-men in blue coatsI am come to survey the Tower this day:Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance.Where be these warders, that they wait not here?Open the gates, 'tis Gloucester that calls.[Within]  Who's there that knocks so imperiously?First Serving-Man	It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.[Within]  Whoe'er he be, you may not be let in.First Serving-Man	Villains, answer you so the lord protector?[Within]  The Lord protect him! so we answer him:We do no otherwise than we are will'd.Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine?There's none protector of the realm but I.Break up the gates, I'll be your warrantize.Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?Gloucester's men rush at the Tower Gates, and WOODVILE the Lieutenant speaks withinWhat noise is this? what traitors have we here?Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?Open the gates, here's Gloucester that would enter.Have patience, noble duke, I may not open,The Cardinal of Winchester forbids:From him I have express commandmentThat thou nor none of thine shall be let in.Faint-hearted Woodvile, prizest him 'fore me?Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate,Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook?Thou art no friend to God or to the king:Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.Serving-Men	Open the gates unto the lord protector,Or we'll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.Enter to the Protector at the Tower Gates BISHOP OF WINCHESTER and his men in tawny coatsBISHOPHow now, ambitious Humphry! what means this?Peel'd priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?BISHOPI do, thou most usurping proditor,And not protector, of the king or realm.Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,Thou that contrivedst to murder our dead lord,Thou that givest whores indulgences to sin:I'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal's hat,If thou proceed in this thy insolence.BISHOPNay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot:This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back:Thy scarlet robes as a child's bearing-clothI'll use to carry thee out of this place.BISHOPDo what thou darest, I beard thee to thy face.What! am I dared and bearded to my face?Draw, men, for all this privileged place,Blue coats to tawny coats. Priest, beware your beard,I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly:Under my feet I stamp thy cardinal's hat:In spite of pope or dignities of church,Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.BISHOPGloucester, thou wilt answer this before the pope.Winchester goose, I cry, a rope! a rope!Now beat them hence, why do you let them stay?Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.Out, tawny coats! out, scarlet hypocrite!Here GLOUCESTER's men beat out BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER's men, and enter in the hurly- burly the Mayor of London and his OfficersFie, lords! that you, being supreme magistrates,Thus contumeliously should break the peace!Peace, mayor! thou know'st little of my wrongs:Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,Hath here distrain'd the Tower to his use.BISHOPHere's Gloucester, a foe to citizens,One that still motions war and never peace,O'ercharging your free purses with large fines,That seeks to overthrow religion,Because he is protector of the realm,And would have armour here out of the Tower,To crown himself king and suppress the prince.I will not answer thee with words, but blows.Here they skirmish againNaught rests for me in this tumultuous strifeBut to make open proclamation:Come, officer, as loud as e'er thou canst,Cry.All manner of men assembled here in arms this dayagainst God's peace and the king's, we charge andcommand you, in his highness' name, to repair toyour several dwelling-places, and not to wear,handle, or use any sword, weapon, or dagger,henceforward, upon pain of death.Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law:But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.BISHOPGloucester, we will meet, to thy cost, be sure:Thy heart-blood I will have for this day's work.I'll call for clubs, if you will not away.This cardinal's more haughty than the devil.Mayor, farewell: thou dost but what thou mayst.BISHOPAbominable Gloucester, guard thy head,For I intend to have it ere long.Exeunt, severally, GLOUCESTER and BISHOP OF WINCHESTER with their Serving-menSee the coast clear'd, and then we will depart.Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!I myself fight not once in forty year.ExeuntSCENE IV. Orleans.Enter, on the walls, a Master Gunner and his BoyMaster-Gunner	Sirrah, thou know'st how Orleans is besieged,And how the English have the suburbs won.Father, I know, and oft have shot at them,Howe'er unfortunate I miss'd my aim.Master-Gunner	But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me:Chief master-gunner am I of this town,Something I must do to procure me grace.The prince's espials have informed meHow the English, in the suburbs close intrench'd,Wont, through a secret grate of iron barsIn yonder tower, to overpeer the city,And thence discover how with most advantageThey may vex us with shot, or with assault.To intercept this inconvenience,A piece of ordnance 'gainst it I have placed,And even these three days have I watch'd,If I could see them.Now do thou watch, for I can stay no longer.If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word,And thou shalt find me at the governor's.ExitFather, I warrant you, take you no care,I'll never trouble you, if I may spy them.ExitEnter, on the turrets, SALISBURY and TALBOT, GLANSDALE, GARGRAVE, and othersTalbot, my life, my joy, again return'd!How wert thou handled being prisoner?Or by what means got'st thou to be released?Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.The Duke of Bedford had a prisonerCall'd the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles,For him was I exchanged and ransomed.But with a baser man of arms by farOnce in contempt they would have barter'd me:Which I, disdaining, scorn'd, and craved death,Rather than I would be so vile esteem'd.In fine, redeem'd I was as I desired.But, O! the treacherous Fastolfe wounds my heart,Whom with my bare fists I would execute,If I now had him brought into my power.Yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertain'd.With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts.In open market-place produced they me,To be a public spectacle to all:Here, said they, is the terror of the French,The scarecrow that affrights our children so.Then broke I from the officers that led me,And with my nails digg'd stones out of the ground,To hurl at the beholders of my shame:My grisly countenance made others fly,None durst come near for fear of sudden death.In iron walls they deem'd me not secure,So great fear of my name 'mongst them was spread,That they supposed I could rend bars of steel,And spurn in pieces posts of adamant:Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had,That walked about me every minute-while,And if I did but stir out of my bed,Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.Enter the Boy with a linstockI grieve to hear what torments you endured,But we will be revenged sufficientlyNow it is supper-time in Orleans:Here, through this grate, I count each oneand view the Frenchmen how they fortify:Let us look in, the sight will much delight thee.Sir Thomas Gargrave, and Sir William Glansdale,Let me have your express opinionsWhere is best place to make our battery next.I think, at the north gate, for there stand lords.And I, here, at the bulwark of the bridge.For aught I see, this city must be famish'd,Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.Here they shoot. SALISBURY and GARGRAVE fallO Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!O Lord, have mercy on me, woful man!What chance is this that suddenly hath cross'd us?Speak, Salisbury, at least, if thou canst speak:How farest thou, mirror of all martial men?One of thy eyes and thy cheek's side struck off!Accursed tower! accursed fatal handThat hath contrived this woful tragedy!In thirteen battles Salisbury o'ercame,Henry the Fifth he first train'd to the wars,Whilst any trump did sound, or drum struck up,His sword did ne'er leave striking in the field.Yet livest thou, Salisbury? though thy speech doth fail,One eye thou hast, to look to heaven for grace:The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive,If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!Bear hence his body, I will help to bury it.Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life?Speak unto Talbot, nay, look up to him.Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort,Thou shalt not die whiles--He beckons with his hand and smiles on me.As who should say 'When I am dead and gone,Remember to avenge me on the French.'Plantagenet, I will, and like thee, Nero,Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn:Wretched shall France be only in my name.Here an alarum, and it thunders and lightensWhat stir is this? what tumult's in the heavens?Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?Enter a MessengerMy lord, my lord, the French have gathered head:The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle join'd,A holy prophetess new risen up,Is come with a great power to raise the siege.Here SALISBURY lifteth himself up and groansHear, hear how dying Salisbury doth groan!It irks his heart he cannot be revenged.Frenchmen, I'll be a Salisbury to you:Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish,Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels,And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.Convey me Salisbury into his tent,And then we'll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.Alarum. ExeuntSCENE V. The same.Here an alarum again: and TALBOT pursueth the  DAUPHIN, and driveth him: then enter JOAN LA  PUCELLE, driving Englishmen before her, and exit after them then re-enter TALBOTWhere is my strength, my valour, and my force?Our English troops retire, I cannot stay them:A woman clad in armour chaseth them.Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLEHere, here she comes. I'll have a bout with thee,Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee:Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch,And straightway give thy soul to him thou servest.Come, come, 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.Here they fightHeavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail?My breast I'll burst with straining of my courageAnd from my shoulders crack my arms asunder.But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.They fight againTalbot, farewell, thy hour is not yet come:I must go victual Orleans forthwith.A short alarum, then enter the town with soldiersO'ertake me, if thou canst, I scorn thy strength.Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starved men,Help Salisbury to make his testament:This day is ours, as many more shall be.ExitMy thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel,I know not where I am, nor what I do,A witch, by fear, not force, like Hannibal,Drives back our troops and conquers as she lists:So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stenchAre from their hives and houses driven away.They call'd us for our fierceness English dogs,Now, like to whelps, we crying run away.A short alarumHark, countrymen! either renew the fight,Or tear the lions out of England's coat,Renounce your soil, give sheep in lions' stead:Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,Or horse or oxen from the leopard,As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.Alarum. Here another skirmishIt will not be: retire into your trenches:You all consented unto Salisbury's death,For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.Pucelle is enter'd into Orleans,In spite of us or aught that we could do.O, would I were to die with Salisbury!The shame hereof will make me hide my head.Exit TALBOT. Alarum, retreat, flourishSCENE VI. The same.Enter, on the walls, JOAN LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, REIGNIER, ALENCON, and SoldiersAdvance our waving colours on the walls,Rescued is Orleans from the EnglishThus Joan la Pucelle hath perform'd her word.Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter,How shall I honour thee for this success?Thy promises are like Adonis' gardensThat one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next.France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess!Recover'd is the town of Orleans:More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the town?Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfiresAnd feast and banquet in the open streets,To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.All France will be replete with mirth and joy,When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won,For which I will divide my crown with her,And all the priests and friars in my realmShall in procession sing her endless praise.A statelier pyramis to her I'll rearThan Rhodope's or Memphis' ever was:In memory of her when she is dead,Her ashes, in an urn more preciousThan the rich-jewel'd of Darius,Transported shall be at high festivalsBefore the kings and queens of France.No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.Come in, and let us banquet royally,After this golden day of victory.Flourish. ExeuntACT IISCENE I. Before Orleans.Enter a Sergeant of a band with two SentinelsSirs, take your places and be vigilant:If any noise or soldier you perceiveNear to the walls, by some apparent signLet us have knowledge at the court of guard.Sergeant, you shall.Exit SergeantThus are poor servitors,When others sleep upon their quiet beds,Constrain'd to watch in darkness, rain and cold.Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, and Forces, with scaling-ladders, their drums beating a dead marchLord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,By whose approach the regions of Artois,Wallon and Picardy are friends to us,This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,Having all day caroused and banqueted:Embrace we then this opportunityAs fitting best to quittance their deceitContrived by art and baleful sorcery.Coward of France! how much he wrongs his fame,Despairing of his own arm's fortitude,To join with witches and the help of hell!Traitors have never other company.But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?A maid, they say.A maid! and be so martial!Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,If underneath the standard of the FrenchShe carry armour as she hath begun.Well, let them practise and converse with spirits:God is our fortress, in whose conquering nameLet us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.Ascend, brave Talbot, we will follow thee.Not all together: better far, I guess,That we do make our entrance several ways,That, if it chance the one of us do fail,The other yet may rise against their force.Agreed: I'll to yond corner.And I to this.And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the rightOf English Henry, shall this night appearHow much in duty I am bound to both.Arm! arm! the enemy doth make assault!Cry: 'St. George,' 'A Talbot.'The French leap over the walls in their shirts.  Enter, several ways, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, half ready, and half unreadyHow now, my lords! what, all unready so?Unready! ay, and glad we 'scaped so well.'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,Hearing alarums at our chamber-doors.Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms,Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterpriseMore venturous or desperate than this.I think this Talbot be a fiend of hell.If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him.Here cometh Charles: I marvel how he sped.Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.Enter CHARLES and JOAN LA PUCELLEIs this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,Make us partakers of a little gain,That now our loss might be ten times so much?Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend!At all times will you have my power alike?Sleeping or waking must I still prevail,Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?Improvident soldiers! had your watch been good,This sudden mischief never could have fall'n.Duke of Alencon, this was your default,That, being captain of the watch to-night,Did look no better to that weighty charge.Had all your quarters been as safely keptAs that whereof I had the government,We had not been thus shamefully surprised.Mine was secure.And so was mine, my lord.And, for myself, most part of all this night,Within her quarter and mine own precinctI was employ'd in passing to and fro,About relieving of the sentinels:Then how or which way should they first break in?Question, my lords, no further of the case,How or which way: 'tis sure they found some placeBut weakly guarded, where the breach was made.And now there rests no other shift but this,To gather our soldiers, scatter'd and dispersed,And lay new platforms to endamage them.Alarum. Enter an English Soldier, crying 'A  Talbot! a Talbot!' They fly, leaving their clothes behindI'll be so bold to take what they have left.The cry of Talbot serves me for a sword,For I have loaden me with many spoils,Using no other weapon but his name.ExitSCENE II. Orleans. Within the town.Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, a Captain, and othersThe day begins to break, and night is fled,Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth.Here sound retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.Retreat soundedBring forth the body of old Salisbury,And here advance it in the market-place,The middle centre of this cursed town.Now have I paid my vow unto his soul,For every drop of blood was drawn from him,There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.And that hereafter ages may beholdWhat ruin happen'd in revenge of him,Within their chiefest temple I'll erectA tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr'd:Upon the which, that every one may read,Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans,The treacherous manner of his mournful deathAnd what a terror he had been to France.But, lords, in all our bloody massacre,I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace,His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,Nor any of his false confederates.'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began,Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds,They did amongst the troops of armed menLeap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.Myself, as far as I could well discernFor smoke and dusky vapours of the night,Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull,When arm in arm they both came swiftly running,Like to a pair of loving turtle-dovesThat could not live asunder day or night.After that things are set in order here,We'll follow them with all the power we have.Enter a MessengerAll hail, my lords! which of this princely trainCall ye the warlike Talbot, for his actsSo much applauded through the realm of France?Here is the Talbot: who would speak with him?The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,With modesty admiring thy renown,By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafeTo visit her poor castle where she lies,That she may boast she hath beheld the manWhose glory fills the world with loud report.Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our warsWill turn unto a peaceful comic sport,When ladies crave to be encounter'd with.You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.Ne'er trust me then, for when a world of menCould not prevail with all their oratory,Yet hath a woman's kindness over-ruled:And therefore tell her I return great thanks,And in submission will attend on her.Will not your honours bear me company?No, truly, it is more than manners will:And I have heard it said, unbidden guestsAre often welcomest when they are gone.Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,I mean to prove this lady's courtesy.Come hither, captain.WhispersYou perceive my mind?I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.ExeuntSCENE III. Auvergne. The COUNTESS's castle.Enter the COUNTESS and her PorterCOUNTESSPorter, remember what I gave in charge,And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.Madam, I will.ExitCOUNTESSThe plot is laid: if all things fall out right,I shall as famous be by this exploitAs Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus' death.Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight,And his achievements of no less account:Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears,To give their censure of these rare reports.Enter Messenger and TALBOTMadam,According as your ladyship desired,By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.COUNTESSAnd he is welcome. What! is this the man?Madam, it is.COUNTESSIs this the scourge of France?Is this the Talbot, so much fear'd abroadThat with his name the mothers still their babes?I see report is fabulous and false:I thought I should have seen some Hercules,A second Hector, for his grim aspect,And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf!It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimpShould strike such terror to his enemies.Madam, I have been bold to trouble you,But since your ladyship is not at leisure,I'll sort some other time to visit you.COUNTESSWhat means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.Stay, my Lord Talbot, for my lady cravesTo know the cause of your abrupt departure.Marry, for that she's in a wrong belief,I go to certify her Talbot's here.Re-enter Porter with keysCOUNTESSIf thou be he, then art thou prisoner.Prisoner! to whom?COUNTESSTo me, blood-thirsty lord,And for that cause I trained thee to my house.Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,For in my gallery thy picture hangs:But now the substance shall endure the like,And I will chain these legs and arms of thine,That hast by tyranny these many yearsWasted our country, slain our citizensAnd sent our sons and husbands captivate.Ha, ha, ha!COUNTESSLaughest thou, wretch? thy mirth shall turn to moan.I laugh to see your ladyship so fondTo think that you have aught but Talbot's shadowWhereon to practise your severity.COUNTESSWhy, art not thou the man?I am indeed.COUNTESSThen have I substance too.No, no, I am but shadow of myself:You are deceived, my substance is not here,For what you see is but the smallest partAnd least proportion of humanity:I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,It is of such a spacious lofty pitch,Your roof were not sufficient to contain't.COUNTESSThis is a riddling merchant for the nonce,He will be here, and yet he is not here:How can these contrarieties agree?That will I show you presently.Winds his horn. Drums strike up: a peal of ordnance. Enter soldiersHow say you, madam? are you now persuadedThat Talbot is but shadow of himself?These are his substance, sinews, arms and strength,With which he yoketh your rebellious necks,Razeth your cities and subverts your townsAnd in a moment makes them desolate.COUNTESSVictorious Talbot! pardon my abuse:I find thou art no less than fame hath bruitedAnd more than may be gather'd by thy shape.Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,For I am sorry that with reverenceI did not entertain thee as thou art.Be not dismay'd, fair lady, nor misconstrueThe mind of Talbot, as you did mistakeThe outward composition of his body.What you have done hath not offended me,Nor other satisfaction do I crave,But only, with your patience, that we mayTaste of your wine and see what cates you have,For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.COUNTESSWith all my heart, and think me honouredTo feast so great a warrior in my house.ExeuntSCENE IV. London. The Temple-garden.Enter the Earls of SOMERSET, SUFFOLK, and WARWICK, RICHARD PLANTAGENET, VERNON, and another LawyerRICHARDGreat lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?Dare no man answer in a case of truth?Within the Temple-hall we were too loud,The garden here is more convenient.RICHARDThen say at once if I maintain'd the truth,Or else was wrangling Somerset in the error?Faith, I have been a truant in the law,And never yet could frame my will to it,And therefore frame the law unto my will.Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch,Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth,Between two blades, which bears the better temper:Between two horses, which doth bear him best,Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye,I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement,But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.RICHARDTut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:The truth appears so naked on my sideThat any purblind eye may find it out.And on my side it is so well apparell'd,So clear, so shining and so evidentThat it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.RICHARDSince you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:Let him that is a true-born gentlemanAnd stands upon the honour of his birth,If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,But dare maintain the party of the truth,Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.I love no colours, and without all colourOf base insinuating flatteryI pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.I pluck this red rose with young SomersetAnd say withal I think he held the right.Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more,Till you conclude that he upon whose sideThe fewest roses are cropp'd from the treeShall yield the other in the right opinion.Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.RICHARDAnd I.Then for the truth and plainness of the case.I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,Giving my verdict on the white rose side.Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,Lest bleeding you do paint the white rose redAnd fall on my side so, against your will.If I my lord, for my opinion bleed,Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurtAnd keep me on the side where still I am.Well, well, come on: who else?Unless my study and my books be false,The argument you held was wrong in you:To SOMERSETIn sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.RICHARDNow, Somerset, where is your argument?Here in my scabbard, meditating thatShall dye your white rose in a bloody red.RICHARDMeantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses,For pale they look with fear, as witnessingThe truth on our side.No, Plantagenet,'Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeksBlush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses,And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.RICHARDHath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?RICHARDAy, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth,Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.Well, I'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses,That shall maintain what I have said is true,Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.RICHARDNow, by this maiden blossom in my hand,I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.RICHARDProud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.I'll turn my part thereof into thy throat.Away, away, good William de la Pole!We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset,His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,Third son to the third Edward King of England:Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?RICHARDHe bears him on the place's privilege,Or durst not, for his craven heart, say thus.By him that made me, I'll maintain my wordsOn any plot of ground in Christendom.Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,For treason executed in our late king's days?And, by his treason, stand'st not thou attainted,Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood,And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.RICHARDMy father was attached, not attainted,Condemn'd to die for treason, but no traitor,And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset,Were growing time once ripen'd to my will.For your partaker Pole and you yourself,I'll note you in my book of memory,To scourge you for this apprehension:Look to it well and say you are well warn'd.Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still,And know us by these colours for thy foes,For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.RICHARDAnd, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,Will I for ever and my faction wear,Until it wither with me to my graveOr flourish to the height of my degree.Go forward and be choked with thy ambition!And so farewell until I meet thee next.ExitHave with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious Richard.ExitRICHARDHow I am braved and must perforce endure it!This blot that they object against your houseShall be wiped out in the next parliamentCall'd for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester,And if thou be not then created York,I will not live to be accounted Warwick.Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,Against proud Somerset and William Pole,Will I upon thy party wear this rose:And here I prophesy: this brawl to-day,Grown to this faction in the Temple-garden,Shall send between the red rose and the whiteA thousand souls to death and deadly night.RICHARDGood Master Vernon, I am bound to you,That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.In your behalf still will I wear the same.And so will I.RICHARDThanks, gentle sir.Come, let us four to dinner: I dare sayThis quarrel will drink blood another day.ExeuntSCENE V. The Tower of London.Enter MORTIMER, brought in a chair, and GaolersKind keepers of my weak decaying age,Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.Even like a man new haled from the rack,So fare my limbs with long imprisonment.And these grey locks, the pursuivants of death,Nestor-like aged in an age of care,Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent,Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent,Weak shoulders, overborne with burthening grief,And pithless arms, like to a wither'd vineThat droops his sapless branches to the ground,Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,Unable to support this lump of clay,Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,As witting I no other comfort have.But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come:We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber,And answer was return'd that he will come.Enough: my soul shall then be satisfied.Poor gentleman! his wrong doth equal mine.Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,Before whose glory I was great in arms,This loathsome sequestration have I had:And even since then hath Richard been obscured,Deprived of honour and inheritance.But now the arbitrator of despairs,Just death, kind umpire of men's miseries,With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence:I would his troubles likewise were expired,That so he might recover what was lost.Enter RICHARD PLANTAGENETMy lord, your loving nephew now is come.Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?RICHARDAy, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck,And in his bosom spend my latter gasp:O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks,That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.And now declare, sweet stem from York's great stock,Why didst thou say, of late thou wert despised?RICHARDFirst, lean thine aged back against mine arm,And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease.This day, in argument upon a case,Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me,Among which terms he used his lavish tongueAnd did upbraid me with my father's death:Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,Else with the like I had requited him.Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake,In honour of a true PlantagenetAnd for alliance sake, declare the causeMy father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.That cause, fair nephew, that imprison'd meAnd hath detain'd me all my flowering youthWithin a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,Was cursed instrument of his decease.RICHARDDiscover more at large what cause that was,For I am ignorant and cannot guess.I will, if that my fading breath permitAnd death approach not ere my tale be done.Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,Deposed his nephew Richard, Edward's son,The first-begotten and the lawful heir,Of Edward king, the third of that descent:During whose reign the Percies of the north,Finding his usurpation most unjust,Endeavor'd my advancement to the throne:The reason moved these warlike lords to thisWas, for that--young King Richard thus removed,Leaving no heir begotten of his body--I was the next by birth and parentage,For by my mother I derived amFrom Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third sonTo King Edward the Third, whereas heFrom John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree,Being but fourth of that heroic line.But mark: as in this haughty attemptThey laboured to plant the rightful heir,I lost my liberty and they their lives.Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,Thy father, Earl of Cambridge, then derivedFrom famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,Marrying my sister that thy mother was,Again in pity of my hard distressLevied an army, weening to redeemAnd have install'd me in the diadem:But, as the rest, so fell that noble earlAnd was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,In whom the tide rested, were suppress'd.RICHARDOf which, my lord, your honour is the last.True, and thou seest that I no issue haveAnd that my fainting words do warrant death,Thou art my heir, the rest I wish thee gather:But yet be wary in thy studious care.RICHARDThy grave admonishments prevail with me:But yet, methinks, my father's executionWas nothing less than bloody tyranny.With silence, nephew, be thou politic:Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster,And like a mountain, not to be removed.But now thy uncle is removing hence:As princes do their courts, when they are cloy'dWith long continuance in a settled place.RICHARDO, uncle, would some part of my young yearsMight but redeem the passage of your age!Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer dothWhich giveth many wounds when one will kill.Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good,Only give order for my funeral:And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopesAnd prosperous be thy life in peace and war!DiesRICHARDAnd peace, no war, befall thy parting soul!In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimageAnd like a hermit overpass'd thy days.Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast,And what I do imagine let that rest.Keepers, convey him hence, and I myselfWill see his burial better than his life.Exeunt Gaolers, bearing out the body of MORTIMERHere dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,Choked with ambition of the meaner sort:And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,Which Somerset hath offer'd to my house:I doubt not but with honour to redress,And therefore haste I to the parliament,Either to be restored to my blood,Or make my ill the advantage of my good.ExitACT IIISCENE I. London. The Parliament-house.Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, EXETER, GLOUCESTER,  WARWICK, SOMERSET, and SUFFOLK, the BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, RICHARD PLANTAGENET, and others.  GLOUCESTER offers to put up a bill, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER snatches it, and tears itBISHOPComest thou with deep premeditated lines,With written pamphlets studiously devised,Humphrey of Gloucester? If thou canst accuse,Or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge,Do it without invention, suddenly,As I with sudden and extemporal speechPurpose to answer what thou canst object.Presumptuous priest! this place commands my patience,Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me.Think not, although in writing I preferr'dThe manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,That therefore I have forged, or am not ableVerbatim to rehearse the method of my pen:No, prelate, such is thy audacious wickedness,Thy lewd, pestiferous and dissentious pranks,As very infants prattle of thy pride.Thou art a most pernicious usurer,Forward by nature, enemy to peace,Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseemsA man of thy profession and degree,And for thy treachery, what's more manifest?In that thou laid'st a trap to take my life,As well at London bridge as at the Tower.Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,The king, thy sovereign, is not quite exemptFrom envious malice of thy swelling heart.BISHOPGloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafeTo give me hearing what I shall reply.If I were covetous, ambitious or perverse,As he will have me, how am I so poor?Or how haps it I seek not to advanceOr raise myself, but keep my wonted calling?And for dissension, who preferreth peaceMore than I do?--except I be provoked.No, my good lords, it is not that offends,It is not that that hath incensed the duke:It is, because no one should sway but he,No one but he should be about the king,And that engenders thunder in his breastAnd makes him roar these accusations forth.But he shall know I am as good--As good!Thou bastard of my grandfather!BISHOPAy, lordly sir, for what are you, I pray,But one imperious in another's throne?Am I not protector, saucy priest?BISHOPAnd am not I a prelate of the church?Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keepsAnd useth it to patronage his theft.BISHOPUnreverent Gloster!Thou art reverentTouching thy spiritual function, not thy life.BISHOPRome shall remedy this.Roam thither, then.My lord, it were your duty to forbear.Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.Methinks my lord should be religiousAnd know the office that belongs to such.Methinks his lordship should be humbler,it fitteth not a prelate so to plead.Yes, when his holy state is touch'd so near.State holy or unhallow'd, what of that?Is not his grace protector to the king?RICHARD[Aside]  Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,Lest it be said 'Speak, sirrah, when you should,Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?'Else would I have a fling at Winchester.Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester,The special watchmen of our English weal,I would prevail, if prayers might prevail,To join your hearts in love and amity.O, what a scandal is it to our crown,That two such noble peers as ye should jar!Believe me, lords, my tender years can tellCivil dissension is a viperous wormThat gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.A noise within, 'Down with the tawny-coats!'What tumult's this?An uproar, I dare warrant,Begun through malice of the bishop's men.A noise again, 'Stones! stones!' Enter MayorO, my good lords, and virtuous Henry,Pity the city of London, pity us!The bishop and the Duke of Gloucester's men,Forbidden late to carry any weapon,Have fill'd their pockets full of pebble stonesAnd banding themselves in contrary partsDo pelt so fast at one another's pateThat many have their giddy brains knock'd out:Our windows are broke down in every streetAnd we for fear compell'd to shut our shops.Enter Serving-men, in skirmish, with bloody patesWe charge you, on allegiance to ourself,To hold your slaughtering hands and keep the peace.Pray, uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.First Serving-man	Nay, if we be forbidden stones,We'll fall to it with our teeth.Second Serving-man	Do what ye dare, we are as resolute.Skirmish againYou of my household, leave this peevish broilAnd set this unaccustom'd fight aside.Third Serving-man	My lord, we know your grace to be a manJust and upright, and, for your royal birth,Inferior to none but to his majesty:And ere that we will suffer such a prince,So kind a father of the commonweal,To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,We and our wives and children all will fightAnd have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.First Serving-man	Ay, and the very parings of our nailsShall pitch a field when we are dead.Begin againStay, stay, I say!And if you love me, as you say you do,Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.O, how this discord doth afflict my soul!Can you, my Lord of Winchester, beholdMy sighs and tears and will not once relent?Who should be pitiful, if you be not?Or who should study to prefer a peace.If holy churchmen take delight in broils?Yield, my lord protector, yield, Winchester,Except you mean with obstinate repulseTo slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.You see what mischief and what murder tooHath been enacted through your enmity,Then be at peace except ye thirst for blood.BISHOPHe shall submit, or I will never yield.Compassion on the king commands me stoop,Or I would see his heart out, ere the priestShould ever get that privilege of me.Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the dukeHath banish'd moody discontented fury,As by his smoothed brows it doth appear:Why look you still so stern and tragical?Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.Fie, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preachThat malice was a great and grievous sin,And will not you maintain the thing you teach,But prove a chief offender in the same?Sweet king! the bishop hath a kindly gird.For shame, my lord of Winchester, relent!What, shall a child instruct you what to do?BISHOPWell, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee,Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.[Aside]  Ay, but, I fear me, with a hollow heart.--See here, my friends and loving countrymen,This token serveth for a flag of truceBetwixt ourselves and all our followers:So help me God, as I dissemble not!BISHOP[Aside]  So help me God, as I intend it not!O, loving uncle, kind Duke of Gloucester,How joyful am I made by this contract!Away, my masters! trouble us no more,But join in friendship, as your lords have done.First Serving-man	Content: I'll to the surgeon's.Second Serving-man	And so will I.Third Serving-man	And I will see what physic the tavern affords.Exeunt Serving-men, Mayor,  and cAccept this scroll, most gracious sovereign,Which in the right of Richard PlantagenetWe do exhibit to your majesty.Well urged, my Lord of Warwick: or sweet prince,And if your grace mark every circumstance,You have great reason to do Richard right,Especially for those occasionsAt Eltham Place I told your majesty.And those occasions, uncle, were of force:Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure isThat Richard be restored to his blood.Let Richard be restored to his blood,So shall his father's wrongs be recompensed.BISHOPAs will the rest, so willeth Winchester.If Richard will be true, not that aloneBut all the whole inheritance I giveThat doth belong unto the house of York,From whence you spring by lineal descent.RICHARDThy humble servant vows obedienceAnd humble service till the point of death.Stoop then and set your knee against my foot,And, in reguerdon of that duty done,I gird thee with the valiant sword of York:Rise Richard, like a true Plantagenet,And rise created princely Duke of York.RICHARDAnd so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!And as my duty springs, so perish theyThat grudge one thought against your majesty!Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York![Aside]  Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York!Now will it best avail your majestyTo cross the seas and to be crown'd in France:The presence of a king engenders loveAmongst his subjects and his loyal friends,As it disanimates his enemies.When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes,For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.Your ships already are in readiness.Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but EXETERAy, we may march in England or in France,Not seeing what is likely to ensue.This late dissension grown betwixt the peersBurns under feigned ashes of forged loveAnd will at last break out into a flame:As fester'd members rot but by degree,Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,So will this base and envious discord breed.And now I fear that fatal prophecyWhich in the time of Henry named the FifthWas in the mouth of every sucking babe,That Henry born at Monmouth should win allAnd Henry born at Windsor lose all:Which is so plain that Exeter doth wishHis days may finish ere that hapless time.ExitSCENE II. France. Before Rouen.Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE disguised, with four Soldiers with sacks upon their backsThese are the city gates, the gates of Rouen,Through which our policy must make a breach:Take heed, be wary how you place your words,Talk like the vulgar sort of market menThat come to gather money for their corn.If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,And that we find the slothful watch but weak,I'll by a sign give notice to our friends,That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,And we be lords and rulers over Rouen,Therefore we'll knock.Knocks[Within]  Qui est la?Paysans, pauvres gens de France,Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.Enter, go in, the market bell is rung.Now, Rouen, I'll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.ExeuntEnter CHARLES, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, REIGNIER, and forcesSaint Denis bless this happy stratagem!And once again we'll sleep secure in Rouen.Here enter'd Pucelle and her practisants,Now she is there, how will she specifyWhere is the best and safest passage in?By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower,Which, once discern'd, shows that her meaning is,No way to that, for weakness, which she enter'd.Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE on the top, thrusting out a torch burningBehold, this is the happy wedding torchThat joineth Rouen unto her countrymen,But burning fatal to the Talbotites!ExitSee, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend,The burning torch in yonder turret stands.Now shine it like a comet of revenge,A prophet to the fall of all our foes!Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends,Enter, and cry 'The Dauphin!' presently,And then do execution on the watch.Alarum. ExeuntAn alarum. Enter TALBOT in an excursionFrance, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears,If Talbot but survive thy treachery.Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress,Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares,That hardly we escaped the pride of France.ExitAn alarum: excursions. BEDFORD, brought in sick  in a chair. Enter TALBOT and BURGUNDY without:  within JOAN LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, on the wallsGood morrow, gallants! want ye corn for bread?I think the Duke of Burgundy will fastBefore he'll buy again at such a rate:'Twas full of darnel, do you like the taste?Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtezan!I trust ere long to choke thee with thine ownAnd make thee curse the harvest of that corn.Your grace may starve perhaps before that time.O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason!What will you do, good grey-beard? break a lance,And run a tilt at death within a chair?Foul fiend of France, and hag of all despite,Encompass'd with thy lustful paramours!Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant ageAnd twit with cowardice a man half dead?Damsel, I'll have a bout with you again,Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.Are ye so hot, sir? yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace,If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.The English whisper together in councilGod speed the parliament! who shall be the speaker?Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,To try if that our own be ours or no.I speak not to that railing Hecate,But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest,Will ye, like soldiers, come and fight it out?Signior, no.Signior, hang! base muleters of France!Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the wallsAnd dare not take up arms like gentlemen.Away, captains! let's get us from the walls,For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.God be wi' you, my lord! we came but to tell youThat we are here.Exeunt from the wallsAnd there will we be too, ere it be long,Or else reproach be Talbot's greatest fame!Vow, Burgundy, by honour of thy house,Prick'd on by public wrongs sustain'd in France,Either to get the town again or die:And I, as sure as English Henry livesAnd as his father here was conqueror,As sure as in this late-betrayed townGreat Coeur-de-lion's heart was buried,So sure I swear to get the town or die.My vows are equal partners with thy vows.But, ere we go, regard this dying prince,The valiant Duke of Bedford. Come, my lord,We will bestow you in some better place,Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me:Here will I sit before the walls of RouenAnd will be partner of your weal or woe.Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you.Not to be gone from hence, for once I readThat stout Pendragon in his litter sickCame to the field and vanquished his foes:Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts,Because I ever found them as myself.Undaunted spirit in a dying breast!Then be it so: heavens keep old Bedford safe!And now no more ado, brave Burgundy,But gather we our forces out of handAnd set upon our boasting enemy.Exeunt all but BEDFORD and AttendantsAn alarum: excursions. Enter FASTOLFE and a CaptainWhither away, Sir John Fastolfe, in such haste?Whither away! to save myself by flight:We are like to have the overthrow again.What! will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?Ay,All the Talbots in the world, to save my life!ExitCowardly knight! ill fortune follow thee!ExitRetreat: excursions. JOAN LA PUCELLE, ALENCON, and CHARLES flyNow, quiet soul, depart when heaven please,For I have seen our enemies' overthrow.What is the trust or strength of foolish man?They that of late were daring with their scoffsAre glad and fain by flight to save themselves.BEDFORD dies, and is carried in by two in his chairAn alarum. Re-enter TALBOT, BURGUNDY, and the restLost, and recover'd in a day again!This is a double honour, Burgundy:Yet heavens have glory for this victory!Warlike and martial Talbot, BurgundyEnshrines thee in his heart and there erectsThy noble deeds as valour's monuments.Thanks, gentle duke. But where is Pucelle now?I think her old familiar is asleep:Now where's the Bastard's braves, and Charles his gleeks?What, all amort? Rouen hangs her head for griefThat such a valiant company are fled.Now will we take some order in the town,Placing therein some expert officers,And then depart to Paris to the king,For there young Henry with his nobles lie.What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.But yet, before we go, let's not forgetThe noble Duke of Bedford late deceased,But see his exequies fulfill'd in Rouen:A braver soldier never couched lance,A gentler heart did never sway in court,But kings and mightiest potentates must die,For that's the end of human misery.ExeuntSCENE III. The plains near Rouen.Enter CHARLES, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forcesDismay not, princes, at this accident,Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered:Care is no cure, but rather corrosive,For things that are not to be remedied.Let frantic Talbot triumph for a whileAnd like a peacock sweep along his tail,We'll pull his plumes and take away his train,If Dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.We have been guided by thee hitherto,And of thy cunning had no diffidence:One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.Search out thy wit for secret policies,And we will make thee famous through the world.We'll set thy statue in some holy place,And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint:Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.Then thus it must be, this doth Joan devise:By fair persuasions mix'd with sugar'd wordsWe will entice the Duke of BurgundyTo leave the Talbot and to follow us.Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,France were no place for Henry's warriors,Nor should that nation boast it so with us,But be extirped from our provinces.For ever should they be expulsed from FranceAnd not have title of an earldom here.Your honours shall perceive how I will workTo bring this matter to the wished end.Drum sounds afar offHark! by the sound of drum you may perceiveTheir powers are marching unto Paris-ward.Here sound an English march. Enter, and pass over at a distance, TALBOT and his forcesThere goes the Talbot, with his colours spread,And all the troops of English after him.French march. Enter BURGUNDY and forcesNow in the rearward comes the duke and his:Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.Summon a parley, we will talk with him.Trumpets sound a parleyA parley with the Duke of Burgundy!Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.What say'st thou, Charles? for I am marching hence.Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France!Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.Speak on, but be not over-tedious.Look on thy country, look on fertile France,And see the cities and the towns defacedBy wasting ruin of the cruel foe.As looks the mother on her lowly babeWhen death doth close his tender dying eyes,See, see the pining malady of France,Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,Which thou thyself hast given her woful breast.O, turn thy edged sword another way,Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosomShould grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore:Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,And wash away thy country's stained spots.Either she hath bewitch'd me with her words,Or nature makes me suddenly relent.Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.Who joint'st thou with but with a lordly nationThat will not trust thee but for profit's sake?When Talbot hath set footing once in FranceAnd fashion'd thee that instrument of ill,Who then but English Henry will be lordAnd thou be thrust out like a fugitive?Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof,Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe?And was he not in England prisoner?But when they heard he was thine enemy,They set him free without his ransom paid,In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.See, then, thou fight'st against thy countrymenAnd joint'st with them will be thy slaughtermen.Come, come, return, return, thou wandering lord:Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.I am vanquished, these haughty words of hersHave batter'd me like roaring cannon-shot,And made me almost yield upon my knees.Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen,And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace:My forces and my power of men are yours:So farewell, Talbot, I'll no longer trust thee.[Aside]  Done like a Frenchman: turn, and turn again!Welcome, brave duke! thy friendship makes us fresh.And doth beget new courage in our breasts.Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this,And doth deserve a coronet of gold.Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,And seek how we may prejudice the foe.ExeuntSCENE IV. Paris. The palace.Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK,  EXETER, VERNON	BASSET, and others. To them with his Soldiers, TALBOTMy gracious prince, and honourable peers,Hearing of your arrival in this realm,I have awhile given truce unto my wars,To do my duty to my sovereign:In sign, whereof, this arm, that hath reclaim'dTo your obedience fifty fortresses,Twelve cities and seven walled towns of strength,Beside five hundred prisoners of esteem,Lets fall his sword before your highness' feet,And with submissive loyalty of heartAscribes the glory of his conquest gotFirst to my God and next unto your grace.KneelsIs this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,That hath so long been resident in France?Yes, if it please your majesty, my liege.Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord!When I was young, as yet I am not old,I do remember how my father saidA stouter champion never handled sword.Long since we were resolved of your truth,Your faithful service and your toil in war,Yet never have you tasted our reward,Or been reguerdon'd with so much as thanks,Because till now we never saw your face:Therefore, stand up, and, for these good deserts,We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury,And in our coronation take your place.Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but VERNON and BASSETNow, sir, to you, that were so hot at sea,Disgracing of these colours that I wearIn honour of my noble Lord of York:Darest thou maintain the former words thou spakest?Yes, sir, as well as you dare patronageThe envious barking of your saucy tongueAgainst my lord the Duke of Somerset.Sirrah, thy lord I honour as he is.Why, what is he? as good a man as York.Hark ye, not so: in witness, take ye that.Strikes himVillain, thou know'st the law of arms is suchThat whoso draws a sword, 'tis present death,Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.But I'll unto his majesty, and craveI may have liberty to venge this wrong,When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you,And, after, meet you sooner than you would.ExeuntACT IVSCENE I. Paris. A hall of state.Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK, TALBOT, EXETER, the Governor, of Paris, and othersLord bishop, set the crown upon his head.BISHOPGod save King Henry, of that name the sixth!Now, governor of Paris, take your oath,That you elect no other king but him,Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,And none your foes but such as shall pretendMalicious practises against his state:This shall ye do, so help you righteous God!Enter FASTOLFEMy gracious sovereign, as I rode from Calais,To haste unto your coronation,A letter was deliver'd to my hands,Writ to your grace from the Duke of Burgundy.Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!I vow'd, base knight, when I did meet thee next,To tear the garter from thy craven's leg,Plucking it offWhich I have done, because unworthilyThou wast installed in that high degree.Pardon me, princely Henry, and the restThis dastard, at the battle of Patay,When but in all I was six thousand strongAnd that the French were almost ten to one,Before we met or that a stroke was given,Like to a trusty squire did run away:In which assault we lost twelve hundred men,Myself and divers gentlemen besideWere there surprised and taken prisoners.Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss,Or whether that such cowards ought to wearThis ornament of knighthood, yea or no.To say the truth, this fact was infamousAnd ill beseeming any common man,Much more a knight, a captain and a leader.When first this order was ordain'd, my lords,Knights of the garter were of noble birth,Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage,Such as were grown to credit by the wars,Not fearing death, nor shrinking for distress,But always resolute in most extremes.He then that is not furnish'd in this sortDoth but usurp the sacred name of knight,Profaning this most honourable order,And should, if I were worthy to be judge,Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swainThat doth presume to boast of gentle blood.Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom!Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight:Henceforth we banish thee, on pain of death.Exit FASTOLFEAnd now, my lord protector, view the letterSent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.What means his grace, that he hath changed his style?No more but, plain and bluntly, 'To the king!'Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?Or doth this churlish superscriptionPretend some alteration in good will?What's here?Reads'I have, upon especial cause,Moved with compassion of my country's wreck,Together with the pitiful complaintsOf such as your oppression feeds upon,Forsaken your pernicious factionAnd join'd with Charles, the rightful King of France.'O monstrous treachery! can this be so,That in alliance, amity and oaths,There should be found such false dissembling guile?What! doth my uncle Burgundy revolt?He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.Is that the worst this letter doth contain?It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with himAnd give him chastisement for this abuse.How say you, my lord? are you not content?Content, my liege! yes, but that I am prevented,I should have begg'd I might have been employ'd.Then gather strength and march unto him straight:Let him perceive how ill we brook his treasonAnd what offence it is to flout his friends.I go, my lord, in heart desiring stillYou may behold confusion of your foes.ExitEnter VERNON and BASSETGrant me the combat, gracious sovereign.And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.This is my servant: hear him, noble prince.And this is mine: sweet Henry, favour him.Be patient, lords, and give them leave to speak.Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim?And wherefore crave you combat? or with whom?With him, my lord, for he hath done me wrong.And I with him, for he hath done me wrong.What is that wrong whereof you both complain?First let me know, and then I'll answer you.Crossing the sea from England into France,This fellow here, with envious carping tongue,Upbraided me about the rose I wear,Saying, the sanguine colour of the leavesDid represent my master's blushing cheeks,When stubbornly he did repugn the truthAbout a certain question in the lawArgued betwixt the Duke of York and him,With other vile and ignominious terms:In confutation of which rude reproachAnd in defence of my lord's worthiness,I crave the benefit of law of arms.And that is my petition, noble lord:For though he seem with forged quaint conceitTo set a gloss upon his bold intent,Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him,And he first took exceptions at this badge,Pronouncing that the paleness of this flowerBewray'd the faintness of my master's heart.Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men,When for so slight and frivolous a causeSuch factious emulations shall arise!Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.Let this dissension first be tried by fight,And then your highness shall command a peace.The quarrel toucheth none but us alone,Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.There is my pledge, accept it, Somerset.Nay, let it rest where it began at first.Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.Confirm it so! Confounded be your strife!And perish ye, with your audacious prate!Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamedWith this immodest clamorous outrageTo trouble and disturb the king and us?And you, my lords, methinks you do not wellTo bear with their perverse objections,Much less to take occasion from their mouthsTo raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves:Let me persuade you take a better course.It grieves his highness: good my lords, be friends.Come hither, you that would be combatants:Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.And you, my lords, remember where we are,In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation:If they perceive dissension in our looksAnd that within ourselves we disagree,How will their grudging stomachs be provokedTo wilful disobedience, and rebel!Beside, what infamy will there arise,When foreign princes shall be certifiedThat for a toy, a thing of no regard,King Henry's peers and chief nobilityDestroy'd themselves, and lost the realm of France!O, think upon the conquest of my father,My tender years, and let us not foregoThat for a trifle that was bought with bloodLet me be umpire in this doubtful strife.I see no reason, if I wear this rose,Putting on a red roseThat any one should therefore be suspiciousI more incline to Somerset than York:Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both:As well they may upbraid me with my crown,Because, forsooth, the king of Scots is crown'd.But your discretions better can persuadeThan I am able to instruct or teach:And therefore, as we hither came in peace,So let us still continue peace and love.Cousin of York, we institute your graceTo be our regent in these parts of France:And, good my Lord of Somerset, uniteYour troops of horsemen with his bands of foot,And, like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,Go cheerfully together and digest.Your angry choler on your enemies.Ourself, my lord protector and the restAfter some respite will return to Calais,From thence to England, where I hope ere longTo be presented, by your victories,With Charles, Alencon and that traitorous rout.Flourish. Exeunt all but YORK, WARWICK, EXETER and VERNONMy Lord of York, I promise you, the kingPrettily, methought, did play the orator.And so he did, but yet I like it not,In that he wears the badge of Somerset.Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not,I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.An if I wist he did,--but let it rest,Other affairs must now be managed.Exeunt all but EXETERWell didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice,For, had the passions of thy heart burst out,I fear we should have seen decipher'd thereMore rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,Than yet can be imagined or supposed.But howsoe'er, no simple man that seesThis jarring discord of nobility,This shouldering of each other in the court,This factious bandying of their favourites,But that it doth presage some ill event.'Tis much when sceptres are in children's hands,But more when envy breeds unkind division,There comes the rain, there begins confusion.ExitSCENE II. Before Bourdeaux.Enter TALBOT, with trump and drumGo to the gates of Bourdeaux, trumpeter:Summon their general unto the wall.Trumpet sounds. Enter General and others, aloftEnglish John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,Servant in arms to Harry King of England,And thus he would: Open your city gates,Be humble to us, call my sovereign yours,And do him homage as obedient subjects,And I'll withdraw me and my bloody power:But, if you frown upon this proffer'd peace,You tempt the fury of my three attendants,Lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire,Who in a moment even with the earthShall lay your stately and air-braving towers,If you forsake the offer of their love.Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge!The period of thy tyranny approacheth.On us thou canst not enter but by death,For, I protest, we are well fortifiedAnd strong enough to issue out and fight:If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee:On either hand thee there are squadrons pitch'd,To wall thee from the liberty of flight,And no way canst thou turn thee for redress,But death doth front thee with apparent spoilAnd pale destruction meets thee in the face.Ten thousand French have ta'en the sacramentTo rive their dangerous artilleryUpon no Christian soul but English Talbot.Lo, there thou stand'st, a breathing valiant man,Of an invincible unconquer'd spirit!This is the latest glory of thy praiseThat I, thy enemy, due thee withal,For ere the glass, that now begins to run,Finish the process of his sandy hour,These eyes, that see thee now well coloured,Shall see thee wither'd, bloody, pale and dead.Drum afar offHark! hark! the Dauphin's drum, a warning bell,Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul,And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.Exeunt General,  and cHe fables not, I hear the enemy:Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.O, negligent and heedless discipline!How are we park'd and bounded in a pale,A little herd of England's timorous deer,Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs!If we be English deer, be then in blood,Not rascal-like, to fall down with a pinch,But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steelAnd make the cowards stand aloof at bay:Sell every man his life as dear as mine,And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.God and Saint George, Talbot and England's right,Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight!ExeuntSCENE III. Plains in Gascony.Enter a Messenger that meets YORK. Enter YORK with trumpet and many SoldiersAre not the speedy scouts return'd again,That dogg'd the mighty army of the Dauphin?They are return'd, my lord, and give it outThat he is march'd to Bourdeaux with his power,To fight with Talbot: as he march'd along,By your espials were discoveredTwo mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,Which join'd with him and made their march for Bourdeaux.A plague upon that villain Somerset,That thus delays my promised supplyOf horsemen, that were levied for this siege!Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,And I am lowted by a traitor villainAnd cannot help the noble chevalier:God comfort him in this necessity!If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.Enter Sir William LUCYThou princely leader of our English strength,Never so needful on the earth of France,Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,Who now is girdled with a waist of ironAnd hemm'd about with grim destruction:To Bourdeaux, warlike duke! to Bourdeaux, York!Else, farewell Talbot, France, and England's honour.O God, that Somerset, who in proud heartDoth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place!So should we save a valiant gentlemanBy forfeiting a traitor and a coward.Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep,That thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep.O, send some succor to the distress'd lord!He dies, we lose, I break my warlike word,We mourn, France smiles, we lose, they daily get,All 'long of this vile traitor Somerset.Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul,And on his son young John, who two hours sinceI met in travel toward his warlike father!This seven years did not Talbot see his son,And now they meet where both their lives are done.Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot haveTo bid his young son welcome to his grave?Away! vexation almost stops my breath,That sunder'd friends greet in the hour of death.Lucy, farewell, no more my fortune can,But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away,'Long all of Somerset and his delay.Exit, with his soldiersThus, while the vulture of seditionFeeds in the bosom of such great commanders,Sleeping neglection doth betray to lossThe conquest of our scarce cold conqueror,That ever living man of memory,Henry the Fifth: whiles they each other cross,Lives, honours, lands and all hurry to loss.ExitSCENE IV. Other plains in Gascony.Enter SOMERSET, with his army, a Captain of TALBOT's with himIt is too late, I cannot send them now:This expedition was by York and TalbotToo rashly plotted: all our general forceMight with a sally of the very townBe buckled with: the over-daring TalbotHath sullied all his gloss of former honourBy this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure:York set him on to fight and die in shame,That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.Here is Sir William Lucy, who with meSet from our o'ermatch'd forces forth for aid.Enter Sir William LUCYHow now, Sir William! whither were you sent?Whither, my lord? from bought and sold Lord Talbot,Who, ring'd about with bold adversity,Cries out for noble York and Somerset,To beat assailing death from his weak legions:And whiles the honourable captain thereDrops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs,And, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue,You, his false hopes, the trust of England's honour,Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.Let not your private discord keep awayThe levied succors that should lend him aid,While he, renowned noble gentleman,Yields up his life unto a world of odds:Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,Alencon, Reignier, compass him about,And Talbot perisheth by your default.York set him on, York should have sent him aid.And York as fast upon your grace exclaims,Swearing that you withhold his levied host,Collected for this expedition.York lies, he might have sent and had the horse,I owe him little duty, and less love,And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.The fraud of England, not the force of France,Hath now entrapp'd the noble-minded Talbot:Never to England shall he bear his life,But dies, betray'd to fortune by your strife.Come, go, I will dispatch the horsemen straight:Within six hours they will be at his aid.Too late comes rescue: he is ta'en or slain,For fly he could not, if he would have fled,And fly would Talbot never, though he might.If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu!His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.ExeuntSCENE V. The English camp near Bourdeaux.Enter TALBOT and JOHN his sonO young John Talbot! I did send for theeTo tutor thee in stratagems of war,That Talbot's name might be in thee revivedWhen sapless age and weak unable limbsShould bring thy father to his drooping chair.But, O malignant and ill-boding stars!Now thou art come unto a feast of death,A terrible and unavoided danger:Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse,And I'll direct thee how thou shalt escapeBy sudden flight: come, dally not, be gone.Is my name Talbot? and am I your son?And shall I fly? O if you love my mother,Dishonour not her honourable name,To make a bastard and a slave of me!The world will say, he is not Talbot's blood,That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.He that flies so will ne'er return again.If we both stay, we both are sure to die.Then let me stay, and, father, do you fly:Your loss is great, so your regard should be,My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.Upon my death the French can little boast,In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.Flight cannot stain the honour you have won,But mine it will, that no exploit have done:You fled for vantage, everyone will swear,But, if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.There is no hope that ever I will stay,If the first hour I shrink and run away.Here on my knee I beg mortality,Rather than life preserved with infamy.Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.Upon my blessing, I command thee go.To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.Part of thy father may be saved in thee.No part of him but will be shame in me.Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.Yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it?Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.You cannot witness for me, being slain.If death be so apparent, then both fly.And leave my followers here to fight and die?My age was never tainted with such shame.And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?No more can I be sever'd from your side,Than can yourself yourself in twain divide:Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I,For live I will not, if my father die.Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.Come, side by side together live and die.And soul with soul from France to heaven fly.ExeuntSCENE VI. A field of battle.Alarum: excursions, wherein JOHN TALBOT is hemmed about, and TALBOT rescues himSaint George and victory! fight, soldiers, fight.The regent hath with Talbot broke his wordAnd left us to the rage of France his sword.Where is John Talbot? Pause, and take thy breath,I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!The life thou gavest me first was lost and done,Till with thy warlike sword, despite of late,To my determined time thou gavest new date.When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck fire,It warm'd thy father's heart with proud desireOf bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,Quicken'd with youthful spleen and warlike rage,Beat down Alencon, Orleans, Burgundy,And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.The ireful bastard Orleans, that drew bloodFrom thee, my boy, and had the maidenhoodOf thy first fight, I soon encountered,And interchanging blows I quickly shedSome of his bastard blood, and in disgraceBespoke him thus, 'Contaminated, baseAnd misbegotten blood I spill of thine,Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mineWhich thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy:'Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father's care,Art thou not weary, John? how dost thou fare?Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,Now thou art seal'd the son of chivalry?Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead:The help of one stands me in little stead.O, too much folly is it, well I wot,To hazard all our lives in one small boat!If I to-day die not with Frenchmen's rage,To-morrow I shall die with mickle age:By me they nothing gain an if I stay,'Tis but the shortening of my life one day:In thee thy mother dies, our household's name,My death's revenge, thy youth, and England's fame:All these and more we hazard by thy stay,All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart,These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart:On that advantage, bought with such a shame,To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,The coward horse that bears me fail and die!And like me to the peasant boys of France,To be shame's scorn and subject of mischance!Surely, by all the glory you have won,An if I fly, I am not Talbot's son:Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot,If son to Talbot, die at Talbot's foot.Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete,Thou Icarus, thy life to me is sweet:If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side,And, commendable proved, let's die in pride.ExeuntSCENE VII. Another part of the field.Alarum: excursions. Enter TALBOT led by a ServantWhere is my other life? mine own is gone,O, where's young Talbot? where is valiant John?Triumphant death, smear'd with captivity,Young Talbot's valour makes me smile at thee:When he perceived me shrink and on my knee,His bloody sword he brandish'd over me,And, like a hungry lion, did commenceRough deeds of rage and stern impatience,But when my angry guardant stood alone,Tendering my ruin and assail'd of none,Dizzy-eyed fury and great rage of heartSuddenly made him from my side to startInto the clustering battle of the French,And in that sea of blood my boy did drenchHis over-mounting spirit, and there died,My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.O, my dear lord, lo, where your son is borne!Enter Soldiers, with the body of JOHN TALBOTThou antic death, which laugh'st us here to scorn,Anon, from thy insulting tyranny,Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,In thy despite shall 'scape mortality.O, thou, whose wounds become hard-favour'd death,Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!Brave death by speaking, whether he will or no,Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say,Had death been French, then death had died to-day.Come, come and lay him in his father's arms:My spirit can no longer bear these harms.Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,Now my old arms are young John Talbot's grave.DiesEnter CHARLES, ALENCON, BURGUNDY, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forcesHad York and Somerset brought rescue in,We should have found a bloody day of this.How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging-wood,Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen's blood!Once I encounter'd him, and thus I said:'Thou maiden youth, be vanquish'd by a maid:'But, with a proud majestical high scorn,He answer'd thus: 'Young Talbot was not bornTo be the pillage of a giglot wench:'So, rushing in the bowels of the French,He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.Doubtless he would have made a noble knight,See, where he lies inhearsed in the armsOf the most bloody nurser of his harms!Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunderWhose life was England's glory, Gallia's wonder.O, no, forbear! for that which we have fledDuring the life, let us not wrong it dead.Enter Sir William LUCY, attended, Herald of the French precedingHerald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent,To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.On what submissive message art thou sent?Submission, Dauphin! 'tis a mere French word,We English warriors wot not what it means.I come to know what prisoners thou hast ta'enAnd to survey the bodies of the dead.For prisoners ask'st thou? hell our prison is.But tell me whom thou seek'st.But where's the great Alcides of the field,Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,Created, for his rare success in arms,Great Earl of Washford, Waterford and Valence,Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield,Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton,Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield,The thrice-victorious Lord of Falconbridge,Knight of the noble order of Saint George,Worthy Saint Michael and the Golden Fleece,Great marshal to Henry the SixthOf all his wars within the realm of France?Here is a silly stately style indeed!The Turk, that two and fifty kingdoms hath,Writes not so tedious a style as this.Him that thou magnifiest with all these titlesStinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmen's only scourge,Your kingdom's terror and black Nemesis?O, were mine eyeballs into bullets turn'd,That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!O, that I could but call these dead to life!It were enough to fright the realm of France:Were but his picture left amongst you here,It would amaze the proudest of you all.Give me their bodies, that I may bear them henceAnd give them burial as beseems their worth.I think this upstart is old Talbot's ghost,He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.For God's sake let him have 'em, to keep them here,They would but stink, and putrefy the air.Go, take their bodies hence.I'll bear them hence, but from their ashes shall be rear'dA phoenix that shall make all France afeard.So we be rid of them, do with 'em what thou wilt.And now to Paris, in this conquering vein:All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.ExeuntACT VSCENE I. London. The palace.Sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, and EXETERHave you perused the letters from the pope,The emperor and the Earl of Armagnac?I have, my lord: and their intent is this:They humbly sue unto your excellenceTo have a godly peace concluded ofBetween the realms of England and of France.How doth your grace affect their motion?Well, my good lord, and as the only meansTo stop effusion of our Christian bloodAnd 'stablish quietness on every side.Ay, marry, uncle, for I always thoughtIt was both impious and unnaturalThat such immanity and bloody strifeShould reign among professors of one faith.Beside, my lord, the sooner to effectAnd surer bind this knot of amity,The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,A man of great authority in France,Proffers his only daughter to your graceIn marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.Marriage, uncle! alas, my years are young!And fitter is my study and my booksThan wanton dalliance with a paramour.Yet call the ambassador, and, as you please,So let them have their answers every one:I shall be well content with any choiceTends to God's glory and my country's weal.Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER in Cardinal's habit, a Legate and two AmbassadorsWhat! is my Lord of Winchester install'd,And call'd unto a cardinal's degree?Then I perceive that will be verifiedHenry the Fifth did sometime prophesy,'If once he come to be a cardinal,He'll make his cap co-equal with the crown.'My lords ambassadors, your several suitsHave been consider'd and debated on.And therefore are we certainly resolvedTo draw conditions of a friendly peace,Which by my Lord of Winchester we meanShall be transported presently to France.And for the proffer of my lord your master,I have inform'd his highness so at largeAs liking of the lady's virtuous gifts,Her beauty and the value of her dower,He doth intend she shall be England's queen.In argument and proof of which contract,Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.And so, my lord protector, see them guardedAnd safely brought to Dover, where inshipp'dCommit them to the fortune of the sea.Exeunt all but CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER and LegateCARDINALStay, my lord legate: you shall first receiveThe sum of money which I promisedShould be deliver'd to his holinessFor clothing me in these grave ornaments.I will attend upon your lordship's leisure.CARDINAL[Aside]  Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,Or be inferior to the proudest peer.Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceiveThat, neither in birth or for authority,The bishop will be overborne by thee:I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,Or sack this country with a mutiny.ExeuntSCENE II. France. Plains in Anjou.Enter CHARLES, BURGUNDY, ALENCON, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, REIGNIER, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forcesThese news, my lord, may cheer our drooping spirits:'Tis said the stout Parisians do revoltAnd turn again unto the warlike French.Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,And keep not back your powers in dalliance.Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us,Else, ruin combat with their palaces!Enter ScoutSuccess unto our valiant general,And happiness to his accomplices!What tidings send our scouts? I prithee, speak.The English army, that divided wasInto two parties, is now conjoined in one,And means to give you battle presently.Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is,But we will presently provide for them.I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there:Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine,Let Henry fret and all the world repine.Then on, my lords, and France be fortunate!ExeuntSCENE III. Before Angiers.Alarum. Excursions. Enter JOAN LA PUCELLEThe regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.Now help, ye charming spells and periapts,And ye choice spirits that admonish meAnd give me signs of future accidents.ThunderYou speedy helpers, that are substitutesUnder the lordly monarch of the north,Appear and aid me in this enterprise.Enter FiendsThis speedy and quick appearance argues proofOf your accustom'd diligence to me.Now, ye familiar spirits, that are cull'dOut of the powerful regions under earth,Help me this once, that France may get the field.They walk, and speak notO, hold me not with silence over-long!Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,I'll lop a member off and give it youIn earnest of further benefit,So you do condescend to help me now.They hang their headsNo hope to have redress? My body shallPay recompense, if you will grant my suit.They shake their headsCannot my body nor blood-sacrificeEntreat you to your wonted furtherance?Then take my soul, my body, soul and all,Before that England give the French the foil.They departSee, they forsake me! Now the time is comeThat France must vail her lofty-plumed crestAnd let her head fall into England's lap.My ancient incantations are too weak,And hell too strong for me to buckle with:Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.ExitExcursions. Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE fighting hand  to hand with YORK. JOAN LA PUCELLE is taken. The French fly.Damsel of France, I think I have you fast:Unchain your spirits now with spelling charmsAnd try if they can gain your liberty.A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace!See, how the ugly wench doth bend her brows,As if with Circe she would change my shape!Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man,No shape but his can please your dainty eye.A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee!And may ye both be suddenly surprisedBy bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds!Fell banning hag, enchantress, hold thy tongue!I prithee, give me leave to curse awhile.Curse, miscreant, when thou comest to the stake.ExeuntAlarum. Enter SUFFOLK with MARGARET in his handBe what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.Gazes on herO fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly!For I will touch thee but with reverent hands,I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,And lay them gently on thy tender side.Who art thou? say, that I may honour thee.Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art.An earl I am, and Suffolk am I call'd.Be not offended, nature's miracle,Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me:So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.Yet, if this servile usage once offend.Go, and be free again, as Suffolk's friend.She is goingO, stay! I have no power to let her pass,My hand would free her, but my heart says noAs plays the sun upon the glassy streams,Twinkling another counterfeited beam,So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak:I'll call for pen and ink, and write my mind.Fie, de la Pole! disable not thyself,Hast not a tongue? is she not here?Wilt thou be daunted at a woman's sight?Ay, beauty's princely majesty is such,Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.Say, Earl of Suffolk--if thy name be so--What ransom must I pay before I pass?For I perceive I am thy prisoner.How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit,Before thou make a trial of her love?Why speak'st thou not? what ransom must I pay?She's beautiful, and therefore to be woo'd,She is a woman, therefore to be won.Wilt thou accept of ransom? yea, or no.Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife,Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.There all is marr'd, there lies a cooling card.He talks at random, sure, the man is mad.And yet a dispensation may be had.And yet I would that you would answer me.I'll win this Lady Margaret. For whom?Why, for my king: tush, that's a wooden thing!He talks of wood: it is some carpenter.Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,And peace established between these realmsBut there remains a scruple in that too,For though her father be the King of Naples,Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor,And our nobility will scorn the match.Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure?It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much.Henry is youthful and will quickly yield.Madam, I have a secret to reveal.What though I be enthrall'd? he seems a knight,And will not any way dishonour me.Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French,And then I need not crave his courtesy.Sweet madam, give me a hearing in a cause--Tush, women have been captivate ere now.Lady, wherefore talk you so?I cry you mercy, 'tis but Quid for Quo.Say, gentle princess, would you not supposeYour bondage happy, to be made a queen?To be a queen in bondage is more vileThan is a slave in base servility,For princes should be free.And so shall you,If happy England's royal king be free.Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?I'll undertake to make thee Henry's queen,To put a golden sceptre in thy handAnd set a precious crown upon thy head,If thou wilt condescend to be my--What?His love.I am unworthy to be Henry's wife.No, gentle madam, I unworthy amTo woo so fair a dame to be his wife,And have no portion in the choice myself.How say you, madam, are ye so content?An if my father please, I am content.Then call our captains and our colours forth.And, madam, at your father's castle wallsWe'll crave a parley, to confer with him.A parley sounded. Enter REIGNIER on the wallsSee, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner!To whom?To me.Suffolk, what remedy?I am a soldier, and unapt to weep,Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness.Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord:Consent, and for thy honour give consent,Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king,Whom I with pain have woo'd and won thereto,And this her easy-held imprisonmentHath gained thy daughter princely liberty.Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?Fair Margaret knowsThat Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.Upon thy princely warrant, I descendTo give thee answer of thy just demand.Exit from the wallsAnd here I will expect thy coming.Trumpets sound. Enter REIGNIER, belowWelcome, brave earl, into our territories:Command in Anjou what your honour pleases.Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child,Fit to be made companion with a king:What answer makes your grace unto my suit?Since thou dost deign to woo her little worthTo be the princely bride of such a lord,Upon condition I may quietlyEnjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,Free from oppression or the stroke of war,My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.That is her ransom, I deliver her,And those two counties I will undertakeYour grace shall well and quietly enjoy.And I again, in Henry's royal name,As deputy unto that gracious king,Give thee her hand, for sign of plighted faith.Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks,Because this is in traffic of a king.AsideAnd yet, methinks, I could be well contentTo be mine own attorney in this case.I'll over then to England with this news,And make this marriage to be solemnized.So farewell, Reignier: set this diamond safeIn golden palaces, as it becomes.I do embrace thee, as I would embraceThe Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.Farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayersShall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.GoingFarewell, sweet madam: but hark you, Margaret,No princely commendations to my king?Such commendations as becomes a maid,A virgin and his servant, say to him.Words sweetly placed and modestly directed.But madam, I must trouble you again,No loving token to his majesty?Yes, my good lord, a pure unspotted heart,Never yet taint with love, I send the king.And this withal.Kisses herThat for thyself: I will not so presumeTo send such peevish tokens to a king.Exeunt REIGNIER and MARGARETO, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay,Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth,There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise:Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount,And natural graces that extinguish art,Repeat their semblance often on the seas,That, when thou comest to kneel at Henry's feet,Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.ExitSCENE IV. Camp of the YORK in Anjou.Enter YORK, WARWICK, and othersBring forth that sorceress condemn'd to burn.Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE, guarded, and a ShepherdAh, Joan, this kills thy father's heart outright!Have I sought every country far and near,And, now it is my chance to find thee out,Must I behold thy timeless cruel death?Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I'll die with thee!Decrepit miser! base ignoble wretch!I am descended of a gentler blood:Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.Out, out! My lords, an please you, 'tis not so,I did beget her, all the parish knows:Her mother liveth yet, can testifyShe was the first fruit of my bachelorship.Graceless! wilt thou deny thy parentage?This argues what her kind of life hath been,Wicked and vile, and so her death concludes.Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!God knows thou art a collop of my flesh,And for thy sake have I shed many a tear:Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.Peasant, avaunt! You have suborn'd this man,Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.'Tis true, I gave a noble to the priestThe morn that I was wedded to her mother.Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the timeOf thy nativity! I would the milkThy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her breast,Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake!Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs a-field,I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee!Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?O, burn her, burn her! hanging is too good.ExitTake her away, for she hath lived too long,To fill the world with vicious qualities.First, let me tell you whom you have condemn'd:Not me begotten of a shepherd swain,But issued from the progeny of kings,Virtuous and holy, chosen from above,By inspiration of celestial grace,To work exceeding miracles on earth.I never had to do with wicked spirits:But you, that are polluted with your lusts,Stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents,Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,Because you want the grace that others have,You judge it straight a thing impossibleTo compass wonders but by help of devils.No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath beenA virgin from her tender infancy,Chaste and immaculate in very thought,Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.Ay, ay: away with her to execution!And hark ye, sirs, because she is a maid,Spare for no faggots, let there be enow:Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,That so her torture may be shortened.Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,That warranteth by law to be thy privilege.I am with child, ye bloody homicides:Murder not then the fruit within my womb,Although ye hale me to a violent death.Now heaven forfend! the holy maid with child!The greatest miracle that e'er ye wrought:Is all your strict preciseness come to this?She and the Dauphin have been juggling:I did imagine what would be her refuge.Well, go to, we'll have no bastards live,Especially since Charles must father it.You are deceived, my child is none of his:It was Alencon that enjoy'd my love.Alencon! that notorious Machiavel!It dies, an if it had a thousand lives.O, give me leave, I have deluded you:'Twas neither Charles nor yet the duke I named,But Reignier, king of Naples, that prevail'd.A married man! that's most intolerable.Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well,There were so many, whom she may accuse.It's sign she hath been liberal and free.And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure.Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee:Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.Then lead me hence, with whom I leave my curse:May never glorious sun reflex his beamsUpon the country where you make abode,But darkness and the gloomy shade of deathEnviron you, till mischief and despairDrive you to break your necks or hang yourselves!Exit, guardedBreak thou in pieces and consume to ashes,Thou foul accursed minister of hell!Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER, attendedCARDINALLord regent, I do greet your excellenceWith letters of commission from the king.For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,Have earnestly implored a general peaceBetwixt our nation and the aspiring French,And here at hand the Dauphin and his trainApproacheth, to confer about some matter.Is all our travail turn'd to this effect?After the slaughter of so many peers,So many captains, gentlemen and soldiers,That in this quarrel have been overthrownAnd sold their bodies for their country's benefit,Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?Have we not lost most part of all the towns,By treason, falsehood and by treachery,Our great progenitors had conquered?O Warwick, Warwick! I foresee with griefThe utter loss of all the realm of France.Be patient, York: if we conclude a peace,It shall be with such strict and severe covenantsAs little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, REIGNIER, and othersSince, lords of England, it is thus agreedThat peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in France,We come to be informed by yourselvesWhat the conditions of that league must be.Speak, Winchester, for boiling choler chokesThe hollow passage of my poison'd voice,By sight of these our baleful enemies.CARDINALCharles, and the rest, it is enacted thus:That, in regard King Henry gives consent,Of mere compassion and of lenity,To ease your country of distressful war,And suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,You shall become true liegemen to his crown:And Charles, upon condition thou wilt swearTo pay him tribute, submit thyself,Thou shalt be placed as viceroy under him,And still enjoy thy regal dignity.Must he be then as shadow of himself?Adorn his temples with a coronet,And yet, in substance and authority,Retain but privilege of a private man?This proffer is absurd and reasonless.'Tis known already that I am possess'dWith more than half the Gallian territories,And therein reverenced for their lawful king:Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd,Detract so much from that prerogative,As to be call'd but viceroy of the whole?No, lord ambassador, I'll rather keepThat which I have than, coveting for more,Be cast from possibility of all.Insulting Charles! hast thou by secret meansUsed intercession to obtain a league,And, now the matter grows to compromise,Stand'st thou aloof upon comparison?Either accept the title thou usurp'st,Of benefit proceeding from our kingAnd not of any challenge of desert,Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.My lord, you do not well in obstinacyTo cavil in the course of this contract:If once it be neglected, ten to oneWe shall not find like opportunity.To say the truth, it is your policyTo save your subjects from such massacreAnd ruthless slaughters as are daily seenBy our proceeding in hostility,And therefore take this compact of a truce,Although you break it when your pleasure serves.How say'st thou, Charles? shall our condition stand?It shall,Only reserved, you claim no interestIn any of our towns of garrison.Then swear allegiance to his majesty,As thou art knight, never to disobeyNor be rebellious to the crown of England,Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.So, now dismiss your army when ye please:Hang up your ensign, let your drums be still,For here we entertain a solemn peace.ExeuntSCENE V. London. The palace.Enter SUFFOLK in conference with KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER and EXETERYour wondrous rare description, noble earl,Of beauteous Margaret hath astonish'd me:Her virtues graced with external giftsDo breed love's settled passions in my heart:And like as rigor of tempestuous gustsProvokes the mightiest hulk against the tide,So am I driven by breath of her renownEither to suffer shipwreck or arriveWhere I may have fruition of her love.Tush, my good lord, this superficial taleIs but a preface of her worthy praise,The chief perfections of that lovely dameHad I sufficient skill to utter them,Would make a volume of enticing lines,Able to ravish any dull conceit:And, which is more, she is not so divine,So full-replete with choice of all delights,But with as humble lowliness of mindShe is content to be at your command,Command, I mean, of virtuous chaste intents,To love and honour Henry as her lord.And otherwise will Henry ne'er presume.Therefore, my lord protector, give consentThat Margaret may be England's royal queen.So should I give consent to flatter sin.You know, my lord, your highness is betroth'dUnto another lady of esteem:How shall we then dispense with that contract,And not deface your honour with reproach?As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths,Or one that, at a triumph having vow'dTo try his strength, forsaketh yet the listsBy reason of his adversary's odds:A poor earl's daughter is unequal odds,And therefore may be broke without offence.Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than that?Her father is no better than an earl,Although in glorious titles he excel.Yes, lord, her father is a king,The King of Naples and Jerusalem,And of such great authority in FranceAs his alliance will confirm our peaceAnd keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.Beside, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.A dower, my lords! disgrace not so your king,That he should be so abject, base and poor,To choose for wealth and not for perfect love.Henry is able to enrich his queenAnd not seek a queen to make him rich:So worthless peasants bargain for their wives,As market-men for oxen, sheep, or horse.Marriage is a matter of more worthThan to be dealt in by attorneyship,Not whom we will, but whom his grace affects,Must be companion of his nuptial bed:And therefore, lords, since he affects her most,It most of all these reasons bindeth us,In our opinions she should be preferr'd.For what is wedlock forced but a hell,An age of discord and continual strife?Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss,And is a pattern of celestial peace.Whom should we match with Henry, being a king,But Margaret, that is daughter to a king?Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,Approves her fit for none but for a king:Her valiant courage and undaunted spirit,More than in women commonly is seen,Will answer our hope in issue of a king,For Henry, son unto a conqueror,Is likely to beget more conquerors,If with a lady of so high resolveAs is fair Margaret he be link'd in love.Then yield, my lords, and here conclude with meThat Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.Whether it be through force of your report,My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for thatMy tender youth was never yet attaintWith any passion of inflaming love,I cannot tell, but this I am assured,I feel such sharp dissension in my breast,Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear,As I am sick with working of my thoughts.Take, therefore, shipping, post, my lord, to France,Agree to any covenants, and procureThat Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to comeTo cross the seas to England and be crown'dKing Henry's faithful and anointed queen:For your expenses and sufficient charge,Among the people gather up a tenth.Be gone, I say, for, till you do return,I rest perplexed with a thousand cares.And you, good uncle, banish all offence:If you do censure me by what you were,Not what you are, I know it will excuseThis sudden execution of my will.And so, conduct me where, from company,I may revolve and ruminate my grief.ExitAy, grief, I fear me, both at first and last.Exeunt GLOUCESTER and EXETERThus Suffolk hath prevail'd, and thus he goes,As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,With hope to find the like event in love,But prosper better than the Trojan did.Margaret shall now be queen, and rule the king,But I will rule both her, the king and realm.ExitACT ISCENE I. London. The palace.Flourish of trumpets: then hautboys. Enter KING  HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and  CARDINAL, on the one side, QUEEN MARGARET, SUFFOLK, YORK, SOMERSET, and BUCKINGHAM, on the otherAs by your high imperial majestyI had in charge at my depart for France,As procurator to your excellence,To marry Princess Margaret for your grace,So, in the famous ancient city, Tours,In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil,The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne and Alencon,Seven earls, twelve barons and twenty reverend bishops,I have perform'd my task and was espoused:And humbly now upon my bended knee,In sight of England and her lordly peers,Deliver up my title in the queenTo your most gracious hands, that are the substanceOf that great shadow I did represent,The happiest gift that ever marquess gave,The fairest queen that ever king received.Suffolk, arise. Welcome, Queen Margaret:I can express no kinder sign of loveThan this kind kiss. O Lord, that lends me life,Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness!For thou hast given me in this beauteous faceA world of earthly blessings to my soul,If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.Great King of England and my gracious lord,The mutual conference that my mind hath had,By day, by night, waking and in my dreams,In courtly company or at my beads,With you, mine alder-liefest sovereign,Makes me the bolder to salute my kingWith ruder terms, such as my wit affordsAnd over-joy of heart doth minister.Her sight did ravish, but her grace in speech,Her words y-clad with wisdom's majesty,Makes me from wondering fall to weeping joys,Such is the fulness of my heart's content.Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.[Kneeling]  Long live Queen Margaret, England'shappiness!We thank you all.FlourishMy lord protector, so it please your grace,Here are the articles of contracted peaceBetween our sovereign and the French king Charles,For eighteen months concluded by consent.[Reads]  'Imprimis, it is agreed between the Frenchking Charles, and William de la Pole, Marquess ofSuffolk, ambassador for Henry King of England, thatthe said Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret,daughter unto Reignier King of Naples, Sicilia andJerusalem, and crown her Queen of England ere thethirtieth of May next ensuing. Item, that the duchyof Anjou and the county of Maine shall be releasedand delivered to the king her father'--Lets the paper fallUncle, how now!Pardon me, gracious lord,Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heartAnd dimm'd mine eyes, that I can read no further.Uncle of Winchester, I pray, read on.[Reads]  'Item, It is further agreed between them,that the duchies of Anjou and Maine shall bereleased and delivered over to the king her father,and she sent over of the King of England's ownproper cost and charges, without having any dowry.'They please us well. Lord marquess, kneel down:We here create thee the first duke of Suffolk,And gird thee with the sword. Cousin of York,We here discharge your grace from being regentI' the parts of France, till term of eighteen monthsBe full expired. Thanks, uncle Winchester,Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset,Salisbury, and Warwick,We thank you all for the great favour done,In entertainment to my princely queen.Come, let us in, and with all speed provideTo see her coronation be perform'd.Exeunt KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and SUFFOLKBrave peers of England, pillars of the state,To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief,Your grief, the common grief of all the land.What! did my brother Henry spend his youth,His valour, coin and people, in the wars?Did he so often lodge in open field,In winter's cold and summer's parching heat,To conquer France, his true inheritance?And did my brother Bedford toil his wits,To keep by policy what Henry got?Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham,Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick,Received deep scars in France and Normandy?Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself,With all the learned council of the realm,Studied so long, sat in the council-houseEarly and late, debating to and froHow France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,And had his highness in his infancyCrowned in Paris in despite of foes?And shall these labours and these honours die?Shall Henry's conquest, Bedford's vigilance,Your deeds of war and all our counsel die?O peers of England, shameful is this league!Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame,Blotting your names from books of memory,Razing the characters of your renown,Defacing monuments of conquer'd France,Undoing all, as all had never been!Nephew, what means this passionate discourse,This peroration with such circumstance?For France, 'tis ours, and we will keep it still.Ay, uncle, we will keep it, if we can,But now it is impossible we should:Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast,Hath given the duchy of Anjou and MaineUnto the poor King Reignier, whose large styleAgrees not with the leanness of his purse.Now, by the death of Him that died for all,These counties were the keys of Normandy.But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?For grief that they are past recovery:For, were there hope to conquer them again,My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears.Anjou and Maine! myself did win them both,Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer:And are the cities, that I got with wounds,Delivered up again with peaceful words?Mort Dieu!For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate,That dims the honour of this warlike isle!France should have torn and rent my very heart,Before I would have yielded to this league.I never read but England's kings have hadLarge sums of gold and dowries with their wives:And our King Henry gives away his own,To match with her that brings no vantages.A proper jest, and never heard before,That Suffolk should demand a whole fifteenthFor costs and charges in transporting her!She should have stayed in France and starvedin France, Before--My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot:It was the pleasure of my lord the King.My Lord of Winchester, I know your mind,'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike,But 'tis my presence that doth trouble ye.Rancour will out: proud prelate, in thy faceI see thy fury: if I longer stay,We shall begin our ancient bickerings.Lordings, farewell, and say, when I am gone,I prophesied France will be lost ere long.ExitSo, there goes our protector in a rage.'Tis known to you he is mine enemy,Nay, more, an enemy unto you all,And no great friend, I fear me, to the king.Consider, lords, he is the next of blood,And heir apparent to the English crown:Had Henry got an empire by his marriage,And all the wealthy kingdoms of the west,There's reason he should be displeased at it.Look to it, lords! let not his smoothing wordsBewitch your hearts, be wise and circumspect.What though the common people favour him,Calling him 'Humphrey, the good Duke ofGloucester,'Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice,'Jesu maintain your royal excellence!'With 'God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!'I fear me, lords, for all this flattering gloss,He will be found a dangerous protector.Why should he, then, protect our sovereign,He being of age to govern of himself?Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,We'll quickly hoise Duke Humphrey from his seat.This weighty business will not brook delay:I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.ExitCousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's prideAnd greatness of his place be grief to us,Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal:His insolence is more intolerableThan all the princes in the land beside:If Gloucester be displaced, he'll be protector.Or thou or I, Somerset, will be protector,Despite Duke Humphrey or the cardinal.Exeunt BUCKINGHAM and SOMERSETPride went before, ambition follows him.While these do labour for their own preferment,Behoves it us to labour for the realm.I never saw but Humphrey Duke of GloucesterDid bear him like a noble gentleman.Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal,More like a soldier than a man o' the church,As stout and proud as he were lord of all,Swear like a ruffian and demean himselfUnlike the ruler of a commonweal.Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age,Thy deeds, thy plainness and thy housekeeping,Hath won the greatest favour of the commons,Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey:And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,In bringing them to civil discipline,Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,When thou wert regent for our sovereign,Have made thee fear'd and honour'd of the people:Join we together, for the public good,In what we can, to bridle and suppressThe pride of Suffolk and the cardinal,With Somerset's and Buckingham's ambition,And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey's deeds,While they do tend the profit of the land.So God help Warwick, as he loves the land,And common profit of his country![Aside]  And so says York, for he hath greatest cause.Then let's make haste away, and look unto the main.Unto the main! O father, Maine is lost,That Maine which by main force Warwick did win,And would have kept so long as breath did last!Main chance, father, you meant, but I meant Maine,Which I will win from France, or else be slain,Exeunt WARWICK and SALISBURYAnjou and Maine are given to the French,Paris is lost, the state of NormandyStands on a tickle point, now they are gone:Suffolk concluded on the articles,The peers agreed, and Henry was well pleasedTo change two dukedoms for a duke's fair daughter.I cannot blame them all: what is't to them?'Tis thine they give away, and not their own.Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillageAnd purchase friends and give to courtezans,Still revelling like lords till all be gone,While as the silly owner of the goodsWeeps over them and wrings his hapless handsAnd shakes his head and trembling stands aloof,While all is shared and all is borne away,Ready to starve and dare not touch his own:So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue,While his own lands are bargain'd for and sold.Methinks the realms of England, France and IrelandBear that proportion to my flesh and bloodAs did the fatal brand Althaea burn'dUnto the prince's heart of Calydon.Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,Even as I have of fertile England's soil.A day will come when York shall claim his own,And therefore I will take the Nevils' partsAnd make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey,And, when I spy advantage, claim the crown,For that's the golden mark I seek to hit:Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,Nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist,Nor wear the diadem upon his head,Whose church-like humours fits not for a crown.Then, York, be still awhile, till time do serve:Watch thou and wake when others be asleep,To pry into the secrets of the state,Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love,With his new bride and England's dear-bought queen,And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars:Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed,And in my standard bear the arms of YorkTo grapple with the house of Lancaster,And, force perforce, I'll make him yield the crown,Whose bookish rule hath pull'd fair England down.ExitSCENE II. GLOUCESTER'S house.Enter GLOUCESTER and his DUCHESSWhy droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn,Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load?Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,As frowning at the favours of the world?Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth,Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?What seest thou there? King Henry's diadem,Enchased with all the honours of the world?If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face,Until thy head be circled with the same.Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold.What, is't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine:And, having both together heaved it up,We'll both together lift our heads to heaven,And never more abase our sight so lowAs to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord,Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts.And may that thought, when I imagine illAgainst my king and nephew, virtuous Henry,Be my last breathing in this mortal world!My troublous dream this night doth make me sad.What dream'd my lord? tell me, and I'll requite itWith sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court,Was broke in twain, by whom I have forgot,But, as I think, it was by the cardinal,And on the pieces of the broken wandWere placed the heads of Edmund Duke of Somerset,And William de la Pole, first duke of Suffolk.This was my dream: what it doth bode, God knows.Tut, this was nothing but an argumentThat he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's groveShall lose his head for his presumption.But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke:Methought I sat in seat of majestyIn the cathedral church of Westminster,And in that chair where kings and queens are crown'd,Where Henry and dame Margaret kneel'd to meAnd on my head did set the diadem.Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright:Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor,Art thou not second woman in the realm,And the protector's wife, beloved of him?Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command,Above the reach or compass of thy thought?And wilt thou still be hammering treachery,To tumble down thy husband and thyselfFrom top of honour to disgrace's feet?Away from me, and let me hear no more!What, what, my lord! are you so cholericWith Eleanor, for telling but her dream?Next time I'll keep my dreams unto myself,And not be cheque'd.Nay, be not angry, I am pleased again.Enter MessengerMy lord protector, 'tis his highness' pleasureYou do prepare to ride unto Saint Alban's,Where as the king and queen do mean to hawk.I go. Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us?Yes, my good lord, I'll follow presently.Exeunt GLOUCESTER and MessengerFollow I must, I cannot go before,While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood,I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocksAnd smooth my way upon their headless necks,And, being a woman, I will not be slackTo play my part in Fortune's pageant.Where are you there? Sir John! nay, fear not, man,We are alone, here's none but thee and I.Enter HUMEJesus preserve your royal majesty!What say'st thou? majesty! I am but grace.But, by the grace of God, and Hume's advice,Your grace's title shall be multiplied.What say'st thou, man? hast thou as yet conferr'dWith Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch,With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer?And will they undertake to do me good?This they have promised, to show your highnessA spirit raised from depth of under-ground,That shall make answer to such questionsAs by your grace shall be propounded him.It is enough, I'll think upon the questions:When from St. Alban's we do make return,We'll see these things effected to the full.Here, Hume, take this reward, make merry, man,With thy confederates in this weighty cause.ExitHume must make merry with the duchess' gold,Marry, and shall. But how now, Sir John Hume!Seal up your lips, and give no words but mum:The business asketh silent secrecy.Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch:Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil.Yet have I gold flies from another coast,I dare not say, from the rich cardinalAnd from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk,Yet I do find it so, for to be plain,They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humour,Have hired me to undermine the duchessAnd buz these conjurations in her brain.They say 'A crafty knave does need no broker,'Yet am I Suffolk and the cardinal's broker.Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go nearTo call them both a pair of crafty knaves.Well, so it stands, and thus, I fear, at lastHume's knavery will be the duchess' wreck,And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall:Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.ExitSCENE III. The palace.Enter three or four Petitioners, PETER, the Armourer's man, being oneMy masters, let's stand close: my lord protectorwill come this way by and by, and then we may deliverour supplications in the quill.Marry, the Lord protect him, for he's a good man!Jesu bless him!Enter SUFFOLK and QUEEN MARGARETHere a' comes, methinks, and the queen with him.I'll be the first, sure.Come back, fool, this is the Duke of Suffolk, andnot my lord protector.How now, fellow! would'st anything with me?I pray, my lord, pardon me, I took ye for my lordprotector.[Reading]  'To my Lord Protector!' Are yoursupplications to his lordship? Let me see them:what is thine?Mine is, an't please your grace, against JohnGoodman, my lord cardinal's man, for keeping myhouse, and lands, and wife and all, from me.Thy wife, too! that's some wrong, indeed. What'syours? What's here!Reads'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing thecommons of Melford.' How now, sir knave!Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our whole township.[Giving his petition]  Against my master, ThomasHorner, for saying that the Duke of York was rightfulheir to the crown.What sayst thou? did the Duke of York say he wasrightful heir to the crown?That my master was? no, forsooth: my master saidthat he was, and that the king was an usurper.Who is there?Enter ServantTake this fellow in, and send forhis master with a pursuivant presently: we'll hearmore of your matter before the King.Exit Servant with PETERAnd as for you, that love to be protectedUnder the wings of our protector's grace,Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.Tears the supplicationAway, base cullions! Suffolk, let them go.Come, let's be gone.ExeuntMy Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise,Is this the fashion in the court of England?Is this the government of Britain's isle,And this the royalty of Albion's king?What shall King Henry be a pupil stillUnder the surly Gloucester's governance?Am I a queen in title and in style,And must be made a subject to a duke?I tell thee, Pole, when in the city ToursThou ran'st a tilt in honour of my loveAnd stolest away the ladies' hearts of France,I thought King Henry had resembled theeIn courage, courtship and proportion:But all his mind is bent to holiness,To number Ave-Maries on his beads,His champions are the prophets and apostles,His weapons holy saws of sacred writ,His study is his tilt-yard, and his lovesAre brazen images of canonized saints.I would the college of the cardinalsWould choose him pope, and carry him to Rome,And set the triple crown upon his head:That were a state fit for his holiness.Madam, be patient: as I was causeYour highness came to England, so will IIn England work your grace's full content.Beside the haughty protector, have we Beaufort,The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham,And grumbling York: and not the least of theseBut can do more in England than the king.And he of these that can do most of allCannot do more in England than the Nevils:Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.Not all these lords do vex me half so muchAs that proud dame, the lord protector's wife.She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies,More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife:Strangers in court do take her for the queen:She bears a duke's revenues on her back,And in her heart she scorns our poverty:Shall I not live to be avenged on her?Contemptuous base-born callet as she is,She vaunted 'mongst her minions t'other day,The very train of her worst wearing gownWas better worth than all my father's lands,Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter.Madam, myself have limed a bush for her,And placed a quire of such enticing birds,That she will light to listen to the lays,And never mount to trouble you again.So, let her rest: and, madam, list to me,For I am bold to counsel you in this.Although we fancy not the cardinal,Yet must we join with him and with the lords,Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.As for the Duke of York, this late complaintWill make but little for his benefit.So, one by one, we'll weed them all at last,And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.Sound a sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER,  CARDINAL, BUCKINGHAM, YORK, SOMERSET, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and the DUCHESSFor my part, noble lords, I care not which,Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.If York have ill demean'd himself in France,Then let him be denay'd the regentship.If Somerset be unworthy of the place,Let York be regent, I will yield to him.Whether your grace be worthy, yea or no,Dispute not that: York is the worthier.Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.The cardinal's not my better in the field.All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.Warwick may live to be the best of all.Peace, son! and show some reason, Buckingham,Why Somerset should be preferred in this.Because the king, forsooth, will have it so.Madam, the king is old enough himselfTo give his censure: these are no women's matters.If he be old enough, what needs your graceTo be protector of his excellence?Madam, I am protector of the realm,And, at his pleasure, will resign my place.Resign it then and leave thine insolence.Since thou wert king--as who is king but thou?--The commonwealth hath daily run to wreck,The Dauphin hath prevail'd beyond the seas,And all the peers and nobles of the realmHave been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.The commons hast thou rack'd, the clergy's bagsAre lank and lean with thy extortions.Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attireHave cost a mass of public treasury.Thy cruelty in executionUpon offenders, hath exceeded law,And left thee to the mercy of the law.They sale of offices and towns in France,If they were known, as the suspect is great,Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.Exit GLOUCESTER. QUEEN MARGARET drops her fanGive me my fan: what, minion! can ye not?She gives the DUCHESS a box on the earI cry you mercy, madam, was it you?Was't I! yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman:Could I come near your beauty with my nails,I'd set my ten commandments in your face.Sweet aunt, be quiet, 'twas against her will.Against her will! good king, look to't in time,She'll hamper thee, and dandle thee like a baby:Though in this place most master wear no breeches,She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.ExitLord cardinal, I will follow Eleanor,And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds:She's tickled now, her fume needs no spurs,She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.ExitRe-enter GLOUCESTERNow, lords, my choler being over-blownWith walking once about the quadrangle,I come to talk of commonwealth affairs.As for your spiteful false objections,Prove them, and I lie open to the law:But God in mercy so deal with my soul,As I in duty love my king and country!But, to the matter that we have in hand:I say, my sovereign, York is meetest manTo be your regent in the realm of France.Before we make election, give me leaveTo show some reason, of no little force,That York is most unmeet of any man.I'll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet:First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride,Next, if I be appointed for the place,My Lord of Somerset will keep me here,Without discharge, money, or furniture,Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands:Last time, I danced attendance on his willTill Paris was besieged, famish'd, and lost.That can I witness, and a fouler factDid never traitor in the land commit.Peace, headstrong Warwick!Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?Enter HORNER, the Armourer, and his man PETER, guardedBecause here is a man accused of treason:Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!Doth any one accuse York for a traitor?What mean'st thou, Suffolk, tell me, what are these?Please it your majesty, this is the manThat doth accuse his master of high treason:His words were these: that Richard, Duke of York,Was rightful heir unto the English crownAnd that your majesty was a usurper.Say, man, were these thy words?An't shall please your majesty, I never said northought any such matter: God is my witness, I amfalsely accused by the villain.By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak them tome in the garret one night, as we were scouring myLord of York's armour.Base dunghill villain and mechanical,I'll have thy head for this thy traitor's speech.I do beseech your royal majesty,Let him have all the rigor of the law.Alas, my lord, hang me, if ever I spake the words.My accuser is my 'prentice, and when I did correcthim for his fault the other day, he did vow upon hisknees he would be even with me: I have goodwitness of this: therefore I beseech your majesty,do not cast away an honest man for a villain'saccusation.Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?This doom, my lord, if I may judge:Let Somerset be regent over the French,Because in York this breeds suspicion:And let these have a day appointed themFor single combat in convenient place,For he hath witness of his servant's malice:This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.I humbly thank your royal majesty.And I accept the combat willingly.Alas, my lord, I cannot fight, for God's sake, pitymy case. The spite of man prevaileth against me. OLord, have mercy upon me! I shall never be able tofight a blow. O Lord, my heart!Sirrah, or you must fight, or else be hang'd.Away with them to prison, and the day of combatshall be the last of the next month. Come,Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.Flourish. ExeuntSCENE IV. GLOUCESTER's garden.Enter MARGARET JOURDAIN, HUME, SOUTHWELL, and BOLINGBROKECome, my masters, the duchess, I tell you, expectsperformance of your promises.Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will herladyship behold and hear our exorcisms?Ay, what else? fear you not her courage.I have heard her reported to be a woman of aninvincible spirit: but it shall be convenient,Master Hume, that you be by her aloft, while we bebusy below, and so, I pray you, go, in God's name,and leave us.Exit HUMEMother Jourdain, be youprostrate and grovel on the earth, John Southwell,read you, and let us to our work.Enter the DUCHESS aloft, HUME followingWell said, my masters, and welcome all. To thisgear the sooner the better.Patience, good lady, wizards know their times:Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,The time of night when Troy was set on fire,The time when screech-owls cry and ban-dogs howl,And spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves,That time best fits the work we have in hand.Madam, sit you and fear not: whom we raise,We will make fast within a hallow'd verge.Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and make the  circle, BOLINGBROKE or SOUTHWELL reads, Conjuro te, and c. It thunders and lightens terribly, then the Spirit risethAdsum.Asmath,By the eternal God, whose name and powerThou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask,For, till thou speak, thou shalt not pass from hence.Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done!'First of the king: what shall of him become?'Reading out of a paperThe duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,But him outlive, and die a violent death.As the Spirit speaks, SOUTHWELL writes the answer'What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?'By water shall he die, and take his end.'What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?'Let him shun castles,Safer shall he be upon the sandy plainsThan where castles mounted stand.Have done, for more I hardly can endure.Descend to darkness and the burning lake!False fiend, avoid!Thunder and lightning. Exit SpiritEnter YORK and BUCKINGHAM with their Guard and break inLay hands upon these traitors and their trash.Beldam, I think we watch'd you at an inch.What, madam, are you there? the king and commonwealAre deeply indebted for this piece of pains:My lord protector will, I doubt it not,See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.Not half so bad as thine to England's king,Injurious duke, that threatest where's no cause.True, madam, none at all: what call you this?Away with them! let them be clapp'd up close.And kept asunder. You, madam, shall with us.Stafford, take her to thee.Exeunt above DUCHESS and HUME, guardedWe'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.All, away!Exeunt guard with MARGARET JOURDAIN, SOUTHWELL,  and cLord Buckingham, methinks, you watch'd her well:A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon!Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.What have we here?Reads'The duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose,But him outlive, and die a violent death.'Why, this is just'Aio te, AEacida, Romanos vincere posse.'Well, to the rest:'Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?By water shall he die, and take his end.What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?Let him shun castles,Safer shall he be upon the sandy plainsThan where castles mounted stand.'Come, come, my lords,These oracles are hardly attain'd,And hardly understood.The king is now in progress towards Saint Alban's,With him the husband of this lovely lady:Thither go these news, as fast as horse cancarry them:A sorry breakfast for my lord protector.Your grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,To be the post, in hope of his reward.At your pleasure, my good lord. Who's withinthere, ho!Enter a ServingmanInvite my Lords of Salisbury and WarwickTo sup with me to-morrow night. Away!ExeuntACT IISCENE I. Saint Alban's.Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, GLOUCESTER, CARDINAL, and SUFFOLK, with Falconers halloingBelieve me, lords, for flying at the brook,I saw not better sport these seven years' day:Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high,And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.But what a point, my lord, your falcon made,And what a pitch she flew above the rest!To see how God in all his creatures works!Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.No marvel, an it like your majesty,My lord protector's hawks do tower so well,They know their master loves to be aloft,And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch.My lord, 'tis but a base ignoble mindThat mounts no higher than a bird can soar.I thought as much, he would be above the clouds.Ay, my lord cardinal? how think you by that?Were it not good your grace could fly to heaven?The treasury of everlasting joy.Thy heaven is on earth, thine eyes and thoughtsBeat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart,Pernicious protector, dangerous peer,That smooth'st it so with king and commonweal!What, cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory?Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?Churchmen so hot? good uncle, hide such malice,With such holiness can you do it?No malice, sir, no more than well becomesSo good a quarrel and so bad a peer.As who, my lord?Why, as you, my lord,An't like your lordly lord-protectorship.Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.And thy ambition, Gloucester.I prithee, peace, good queen,And whet not on these furious peers,For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.Let me be blessed for the peace I make,Against this proud protector, with my sword![Aside to CARDINAL]  Faith, holy uncle, would'twere come to that![Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Marry, when thou darest.[Aside to CARDINAL]  Make up no factiousnumbers for the matter,In thine own person answer thy abuse.[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Ay, where thou darestnot peep: an if thou darest,This evening, on the east side of the grove.How now, my lords!Believe me, cousin Gloucester,Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly,We had had more sport.Aside to GLOUCESTERCome with thy two-hand sword.True, uncle.[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Are ye advised? theeast side of the grove?[Aside to CARDINAL]  Cardinal, I am with you.Why, how now, uncle Gloucester!Talking of hawking, nothing else, my lord.Aside to CARDINALNow, by God's mother, priest, I'll shave your crown for this,Or all my fence shall fail.[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Medice, teipsum--Protector, see to't well, protect yourself.The winds grow high, so do your stomachs, lords.How irksome is this music to my heart!When such strings jar, what hope of harmony?I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife.Enter a Townsman of Saint Alban's, crying 'A miracle!'What means this noise?Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?A miracle! a miracle!Come to the king and tell him what miracle.Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine,Within this half-hour, hath received his sight,A man that ne'er saw in his life before.Now, God be praised, that to believing soulsGives light in darkness, comfort in despair!Enter the Mayor of Saint Alban's and his  brethren, bearing SIMPCOX, between two in a chair, SIMPCOX's Wife followingHere comes the townsmen on procession,To present your highness with the man.Great is his comfort in this earthly vale,Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.Stand by, my masters: bring him near the king,His highness' pleasure is to talk with him.Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,That we for thee may glorify the Lord.What, hast thou been long blind and now restored?Born blind, an't please your grace.Ay, indeed, was he.What woman is this?His wife, an't like your worship.Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst havebetter told.Where wert thou born?At Berwick in the north, an't like your grace.Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee:Let never day nor night unhallow'd pass,But still remember what the Lord hath done.Tell me, good fellow, camest thou here by chance,Or of devotion, to this holy shrine?God knows, of pure devotion, being call'dA hundred times and oftener, in my sleep,By good Saint Alban, who said, 'Simpcox, come,Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.'Most true, forsooth, and many time and oftMyself have heard a voice to call him so.What, art thou lame?Ay, God Almighty help me!How camest thou so?A fall off of a tree.A plum-tree, master.How long hast thou been blind?Born so, master.What, and wouldst climb a tree?But that in all my life, when I was a youth.Too true, and bought his climbing very dear.Mass, thou lovedst plums well, that wouldstventure so.Alas,  good master, my wife desired some damsons,And made me climb, with danger of my life.A subtle knave! but yet it shall not serve.Let me see thine eyes: wink now: now open them:In my opinion yet thou seest not well.Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God andSaint Alban.Say'st thou me so? What colour is this cloak of?Red, master, red as blood.Why, that's well said. What colour is my gown of?Black, forsooth: coal-black as jet.Why, then, thou know'st what colour jet is of?And yet, I think, jet did he never see.But cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.Never, before this day, in all his life.Tell me, sirrah, what's my name?Alas, master, I know not.What's his name?I know not.Nor his?No, indeed, master.What's thine own name?Saunder Simpcox, an if it please you, master.Then, Saunder, sit there, the lyingest knave inChristendom. If thou hadst been born blind, thoumightest as well have known all our names as thus toname the several colours we do wear. Sight maydistinguish of colours, but suddenly to nominate themall, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban herehath done a miracle, and would ye not think hiscunning to be great, that could restore this crippleto his legs again?O master, that you could!My masters of Saint Alban's, have you not beadles inyour town, and things called whips?Yes, my lord, if it please your grace.Then send for one presently.Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.Exit an AttendantNow fetch me a stool hither by and by. Now, sirrah,if you mean to save yourself from whipping, leap meover this stool and run away.Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone:You go about to torture me in vain.Enter a Beadle with whipsWell, sir, we must have you find your legs. Sirrahbeadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.I will, my lord. Come on, sirrah, off with yourdoublet quickly.Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps over the stool and runs away, and they follow and cry, 'A miracle!'O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?It made me laugh to see the villain run.Follow the knave, and take this drab away.Alas, sir, we did it for pure need.Let them be whipped through every market-town, tillthey come to Berwick, from whence they came.Exeunt Wife, Beadle, Mayor,  and cDuke Humphrey has done a miracle to-day.True, made the lame to leap and fly away.But you have done more miracles than I,You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.Enter BUCKINGHAMWhat tidings with our cousin Buckingham?Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold.A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,Under the countenance and confederacyOf Lady Eleanor, the protector's wife,The ringleader and head of all this rout,Have practised dangerously against your state,Dealing with witches and with conjurers:Whom we have apprehended in the fact,Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,Demanding of King Henry's life and death,And other of your highness' privy-council,As more at large your grace shall understand.[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  And so, my lord protector,by this meansYour lady is forthcoming yet at London.This news, I think, hath turn'd your weapon's edge,'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart:Sorrow and grief have vanquish'd all my powers,And, vanquish'd as I am, I yield to thee,Or to the meanest groom.O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest.And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal,How I have loved my king and commonweal:And, for my wife, I know not how it stands,Sorry I am to hear what I have heard:Noble she is, but if she have forgotHonour and virtue and conversed with suchAs, like to pitch, defile nobility,I banish her my bed and companyAnd give her as a prey to law and shame,That hath dishonour'd Gloucester's honest name.Well, for this night we will repose us here:To-morrow toward London back again,To look into this business thoroughlyAnd call these foul offenders to their answersAnd poise the cause in justice' equal scales,Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.Flourish. ExeuntSCENE II. London. YORK'S garden.Enter YORK, SALISBURY, and WARWICKNow, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,Our simple supper ended, give me leaveIn this close walk to satisfy myself,In craving your opinion of my title,Which is infallible, to England's crown.My lord, I long to hear it at full.Sweet York, begin: and if thy claim be good,The Nevils are thy subjects to command.Then thus:Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons:The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales,The second, William of Hatfield, and the third,Lionel Duke of Clarence: next to whomWas John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster,The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York,The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester,William of Windsor was the seventh and last.Edward the Black Prince died before his fatherAnd left behind him Richard, his only son,Who after Edward the Third's death reign'd as king,Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,Crown'd by the name of Henry the Fourth,Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king,Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she came,And him to Pomfret, where, as all you know,Harmless Richard was murder'd traitorously.Father, the duke hath told the truth:Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.Which now they hold by force and not by right,For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,The issue of the next son should have reign'd.But William of Hatfield died without an heir.The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose lineI claimed the crown, had issue, Philippe, a daughter,Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March:Edmund had issue, Roger Earl of March,Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne and Eleanor.This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,As I have read, laid claim unto the crown,And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,Who kept him in captivity till he died.But to the rest.His eldest sister, Anne,My mother, being heir unto the crownMarried Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was sonTo Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son.By her I claim the kingdom: she was heirTo Roger Earl of March, who was the sonOf Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippe,Sole daughter unto Lionel Duke of Clarence:So, if the issue of the elder sonSucceed before the younger, I am king.What plain proceeding is more plain than this?Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,The fourth son, York claims it from the third.Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign:It fails not yet, but flourishes in theeAnd in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together,And in this private plot be we the firstThat shall salute our rightful sovereignWith honour of his birthright to the crown.Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king!We thank you, lords. But I am not your kingTill I be crown'd and that my sword be stain'dWith heart-blood of the house of Lancaster,And that's not suddenly to be perform'd,But with advice and silent secrecy.Do you as I do in these dangerous days:Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence,At Beaufort's pride, at Somerset's ambition,At Buckingham and all the crew of them,Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock,That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey:'Tis that they seek, and they in seeking thatShall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.My lord, break we off, we know your mind at full.My heart assures me that the Earl of WarwickShall one day make the Duke of York a king.And, Nevil, this I do assure myself:Richard shall live to make the Earl of WarwickThe greatest man in England but the king.ExeuntSCENE III. A hall of justice.Sound trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN  MARGARET, GLOUCESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, and SALISBURY,  the DUCHESS, MARGARET JOURDAIN, SOUTHWELL, HUME, and BOLINGBROKE, under guardStand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester's wife:In sight of God and us, your guilt is great:Receive the sentence of the law for sinsSuch as by God's book are adjudged to death.You four, from hence to prison back again,From thence unto the place of execution:The witch in Smithfield shall be burn'd to ashes,And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.You, madam, for you are more nobly born,Despoiled of your honour in your life,Shall, after three days' open penance done,Live in your country here in banishment,With Sir John Stanley, in the Isle of Man.Welcome is banishment, welcome were my death.Eleanor, the law, thou see'st, hath judged thee:I cannot justify whom the law condemns.Exeunt DUCHESS and other prisoners, guardedMine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine ageWill bring thy head with sorrow to the ground!I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go,Sorrow would solace and mine age would ease.Stay, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester: ere thou go,Give up thy staff: Henry will to himselfProtector be, and God shall be my hope,My stay, my guide and lantern to my feet:And go in peace, Humphrey, no less belovedThan when thou wert protector to thy King.I see no reason why a king of yearsShould be to be protected like a child.God and King Henry govern England's realm.Give up your staff, sir, and the king his realm.My staff? here, noble Henry, is my staff:As willingly do I the same resignAs e'er thy father Henry made it mine,And even as willingly at thy feet I leave itAs others would ambitiously receive it.Farewell, good king: when I am dead and gone,May honourable peace attend thy throne!ExitWhy, now is Henry king, and Margaret queen,And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself,That bears so shrewd a maim, two pulls at once,His lady banish'd, and a limb lopp'd off.This staff of honour raught, there let it standWhere it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays,Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days.Lords, let him go. Please it your majesty,This is the day appointed for the combat,And ready are the appellant and defendant,The armourer and his man, to enter the lists,So please your highness to behold the fight.Ay, good my lord, for purposely thereforeLeft I the court, to see this quarrel tried.O God's name, see the lists and all things fit:Here let them end it, and God defend the right!I never saw a fellow worse bested,Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant,The servant of this armourer, my lords.Enter at one door, HORNER, the Armourer, and his  Neighbours, drinking to him so much that he is drunk,  and he enters with a drum before him and his staff  with a sand-bag fastened to it, and at the other  door PETER, his man, with a drum and sand-bag, and 'Prentices drinking to himHere, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup ofsack: and fear not, neighbour, you shall do well enough.And here, neighbour, here's a cup of charneco.And here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour:drink, and fear not your man.Let it come, i' faith, and I'll pledge you all, anda fig for Peter!First 'Prentice	Here, Peter, I drink to thee: and be not afraid.Second 'Prentice	Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fightfor credit of the 'prentices.I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I prayyou, for I think I have taken my last draught inthis world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give theemy apron: and, Will, thou shalt have my hammer:and here, Tom, take all the money that I have. OLord bless me! I pray God! for I am never able todeal with my master, he hath learnt me so much fence already.Come, leave your drinking, and fall to blows.Sirrah, what's thy name?Peter, forsooth.Peter! what more?Thump.Thump! then see thou thump thy master well.Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man'sinstigation, to prove him a knave and myself anhonest man: and touching the Duke of York, I willtake my death, I never meant him any ill, nor theking, nor the queen: and therefore, Peter, have atthee with a downright blow!Dispatch: this knave's tongue begins to double.Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants!Alarum. They fight, and PETER strikes him downHold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.DiesTake away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and thegood wine in thy master's way.O God, have I overcome mine enemy in this presence?O Peter, thou hast prevailed in right!Go, take hence that traitor from our sight,For his death we do perceive his guilt:And God in justice hath revealed to usThe truth and innocence of this poor fellow,Which he had thought to have murder'd wrongfully.Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.Sound a flourish. ExeuntSCENE IV. A street.Enter GLOUCESTER and his Servingmen, in mourning cloaksThus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud,And after summer evermore succeedsBarren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold:So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.Sirs, what's o'clock?Ten, my lord.Ten is the hour that was appointed meTo watch the coming of my punish'd duchess:Uneath may she endure the flinty streets,To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrookThe abject people gazing on thy face,With envious looks, laughing at thy shame,That erst did follow thy proud chariot-wheelsWhen thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.But, soft! I think she comes, and I'll prepareMy tear-stain'd eyes to see her miseries.Enter the DUCHESS in a white sheet, and a taper  burning in her hand, with STANLEY, the Sheriff, and OfficersSo please your grace, we'll take her from the sheriff.No, stir not, for your lives, let her pass by.Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!See how the giddy multitude do point,And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee!Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame,And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine!Be patient, gentle Nell, forget this grief.Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!For whilst I think I am thy married wifeAnd thou a prince, protector of this land,Methinks I should not thus be led along,Mail'd up in shame, with papers on my back,And followed with a rabble that rejoiceTo see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet,And when I start, the envious people laughAnd bid me be advised how I tread.Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?Trow'st thou that e'er I'll look upon the world,Or count them happy that enjoy the sun?No, dark shall be my light and night my day,To think upon my pomp shall be my hell.Sometime I'll say, I am Duke Humphrey's wife,And he a prince and ruler of the land:Yet so he ruled and such a prince he wasAs he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,Was made a wonder and a pointing-stockTo every idle rascal follower.But be thou mild and blush not at my shame,Nor stir at nothing till the axe of deathHang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will,For Suffolk, he that can do all in allWith her that hateth thee and hates us all,And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings,And, fly thou how thou canst, they'll tangle thee:But fear not thou, until thy foot be snared,Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.Ah, Nell, forbear! thou aimest all awry,I must offend before I be attainted,And had I twenty times so many foes,And each of them had twenty times their power,All these could not procure me any scathe,So long as I am loyal, true and crimeless.Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped awayBut I in danger for the breach of law.Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell:I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience,These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.Enter a HeraldI summon your grace to his majesty's parliament,Holden at Bury the first of this next month.And my consent ne'er ask'd herein before!This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.Exit HeraldMy Nell, I take my leave: and, master sheriff,Let not her penance exceed the king's commission.An't please your grace, here my commission stays,And Sir John Stanley is appointed nowTo take her with him to the Isle of Man.Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?So am I given in charge, may't please your grace.Entreat her not the worse in that I prayYou use her well: the world may laugh again,And I may live to do you kindness ifYou do it her: and so, Sir John, farewell!What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell!Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.Exeunt GLOUCESTER and ServingmenArt thou gone too? all comfort go with thee!For none abides with me: my joy is death,Death, at whose name I oft have been afear'd,Because I wish'd this world's eternity.Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence,I care not whither, for I beg no favour,Only convey me where thou art commanded.Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man,There to be used according to your state.That's bad enough, for I am but reproach:And shall I then be used reproachfully?Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphrey's lady,According to that state you shall be used.Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.It is my office, and, madam, pardon me.Ay, ay, farewell, thy office is discharged.Come, Stanley, shall we go?Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,And go we to attire you for our journey.My shame will not be shifted with my sheet:No, it will hang upon my richest robesAnd show itself, attire me how I can.Go, lead the way, I long to see my prison.ExeuntACT IIISCENE I. The Abbey at Bury St. Edmund's.Sound a sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN  MARGARET, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, YORK, BUCKINGHAM, SALISBURY and WARWICK to the ParliamentI muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come:'Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now.Can you not see? or will ye not observeThe strangeness of his alter'd countenance?With what a majesty he bears himself,How insolent of late he is become,How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?We know the time since he was mild and affable,And if we did but glance a far-off look,Immediately he was upon his knee,That all the court admired him for submission:But meet him now, and, be it in the morn,When every one will give the time of day,He knits his brow and shows an angry eye,And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,Disdaining duty that to us belongs.Small curs are not regarded when they grin,But great men tremble when the lion roars,And Humphrey is no little man in England.First note that he is near you in descent,And should you fall, he as the next will mount.Me seemeth then it is no policy,Respecting what a rancorous mind he bearsAnd his advantage following your decease,That he should come about your royal personOr be admitted to your highness' council.By flattery hath he won the commons' hearts,And when he please to make commotion,'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him.Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted,Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the gardenAnd choke the herbs for want of husbandry.The reverent care I bear unto my lordMade me collect these dangers in the duke.If it be fond, call it a woman's fear,Which fear if better reasons can supplant,I will subscribe and say I wrong'd the duke.My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,Reprove my allegation, if you can,Or else conclude my words effectual.Well hath your highness seen into this duke,And, had I first been put to speak my mind,I think I should have told your grace's tale.The duchess, by his subornation,Upon my life, began her devilish practises:Or, if he were not privy to those faults,Yet, by reputing of his high descent,As next the king he was successive heir,And such high vaunts of his nobility,Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick duchessBy wicked means to frame our sovereign's fall.Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep,And in his simple show he harbours treason.The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.No, no, my sovereign, Gloucester is a manUnsounded yet and full of deep deceit.Did he not, contrary to form of law,Devise strange deaths for small offences done?And did he not, in his protectorship,Levy great sums of money through the realmFor soldiers' pay in France, and never sent it?By means whereof the towns each day revolted.Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown.Which time will bring to light in smoothDuke Humphrey.My lords, at once: the care you have of us,To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot,Is worthy praise: but, shall I speak my conscience,Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocentFrom meaning treason to our royal personAs is the sucking lamb or harmless dove:The duke is virtuous, mild and too well givenTo dream on evil or to work my downfall.Ah, what's more dangerous than this fond affiance!Seems he a dove? his feathers are but borrowed,For he's disposed as the hateful raven:Is he a lamb? his skin is surely lent him,For he's inclined as is the ravenous wolf.Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?Take heed, my lord, the welfare of us allHangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.Enter SOMERSETAll health unto my gracious sovereign!Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?That all your interest in those territoriesIs utterly bereft you, all is lost.Cold news, Lord Somerset: but God's will be done![Aside]  Cold news for me, for I had hope of FranceAs firmly as I hope for fertile England.Thus are my blossoms blasted in the budAnd caterpillars eat my leaves away,But I will remedy this gear ere long,Or sell my title for a glorious grave.Enter GLOUCESTERAll happiness unto my lord the king!Pardon, my liege, that I have stay'd so long.Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art:I do arrest thee of high treason here.Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blushNor change my countenance for this arrest:A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.The purest spring is not so free from mudAs I am clear from treason to my sovereign:Who can accuse me? wherein am I guilty?'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France,And, being protector, stayed the soldiers' pay,By means whereof his highness hath lost France.Is it but thought so? what are they that think it?I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay,Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.So help me God, as I have watch'd the night,Ay, night by night, in studying good for England,That doit that e'er I wrested from the king,Or any groat I hoarded to my use,Be brought against me at my trial-day!No, many a pound of mine own proper store,Because I would not tax the needy commons,Have I disbursed to the garrisons,And never ask'd for restitution.It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.I say no more than truth, so help me God!In your protectorship you did deviseStrange tortures for offenders never heard of,That England was defamed by tyranny.Why, 'tis well known that, whiles I wasprotector,Pity was all the fault that was in me,For I should melt at an offender's tears,And lowly words were ransom for their fault.Unless it were a bloody murderer,Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,I never gave them condign punishment:Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I torturedAbove the felon or what trespass else.My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered:But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge,Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.I do arrest you in his highness' name,And here commit you to my lord cardinalTo keep, until your further time of trial.My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hopeThat you will clear yourself from all suspect:My conscience tells me you are innocent.Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous:Virtue is choked with foul ambitionAnd charity chased hence by rancour's hand,Foul subornation is predominantAnd equity exiled your highness' land.I know their complot is to have my life,And if my death might make this island happy,And prove the period of their tyranny,I would expend it with all willingness:But mine is made the prologue to their play,For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice,And Suffolk's cloudy brow his stormy hate,Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongueThe envious load that lies upon his heart,And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,Whose overweening arm I have pluck'd back,By false accuse doth level at my life:And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,And with your best endeavour have stirr'd upMy liefest liege to be mine enemy:Ay, all you have laid your heads together--Myself had notice of your conventicles--And all to make away my guiltless life.I shall not want false witness to condemn me,Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt,The ancient proverb will be well effected:'A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.'My liege, his railing is intolerable:If those that care to keep your royal personFrom treason's secret knife and traitors' rageBe thus upbraided, chid and rated at,And the offender granted scope of speech,'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace.Hath he not twit our sovereign lady hereWith ignominious words, though clerkly couch'd,As if she had suborned some to swearFalse allegations to o'erthrow his state?But I can give the loser leave to chide.Far truer spoke than meant: I lose, indeed,Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false!And well such losers may have leave to speak.He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day:Lord cardinal, he is your prisoner.Sirs, take away the duke, and guard him sure.Ah! thus King Henry throws away his crutchBefore his legs be firm to bear his body.Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.Ah, that my fear were false! ah, that it were!For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.Exit, guardedMy lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best,Do or undo, as if ourself were here.What, will your highness leave the parliament?Ay, Margaret, my heart is drown'd with grief,Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes,My body round engirt with misery,For what's more miserable than discontent?Ah, uncle Humphrey! in thy face I seeThe map of honour, truth and loyalty:And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to comeThat e'er I proved thee false or fear'd thy faith.What louring star now envies thy estate,That these great lords and Margaret our queenDo seek subversion of thy harmless life?Thou never didst them wrong, nor no man wrong,And as the butcher takes away the calfAnd binds the wretch, and beats it when it strays,Bearing it to the bloody slaughter-house,Even so remorseless have they borne him hence,And as the dam runs lowing up and down,Looking the way her harmless young one went,And can do nought but wail her darling's loss,Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's caseWith sad unhelpful tears, and with dimm'd eyesLook after him and cannot do him good,So mighty are his vowed enemies.His fortunes I will weep, and, 'twixt each groanSay 'Who's a traitor? Gloucester he is none.'Exeunt all but QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, and YORK, SOMERSET remains apartFree lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams.Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,Too full of foolish pity, and Gloucester's showBeguiles him as the mournful crocodileWith sorrow snares relenting passengers,Or as the snake roll'd in a flowering bank,With shining chequer'd slough, doth sting a childThat for the beauty thinks it excellent.Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I--And yet herein I judge mine own wit good--This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,To rid us of the fear we have of him.That he should die is worthy policy,But yet we want a colour for his death:'Tis meet he be condemn'd by course of law.But, in my mind, that were no policy:The king will labour still to save his life,The commons haply rise, to save his life,And yet we have but trivial argument,More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.So that, by this, you would not have him die.Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!'Tis York that hath more reason for his death.But, my lord cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk,Say as you think, and speak it from your souls,Were't not all one, an empty eagle were setTo guard the chicken from a hungry kite,As place Duke Humphrey for the king's protector?So the poor chicken should be sure of death.Madam, 'tis true, and were't not madness, then,To make the fox surveyor of the fold?Who being accused a crafty murderer,His guilt should be but idly posted over,Because his purpose is not executed.No, let him die, in that he is a fox,By nature proved an enemy to the flock,Before his chaps be stain'd with crimson blood,As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.And do not stand on quillets how to slay him:Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,Sleeping or waking, 'tis no matter how,So he be dead, for that is good deceitWhich mates him first that first intends deceit.Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.Not resolute, except so much were done,For things are often spoke and seldom meant:But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,Seeing the deed is meritorious,And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,Say but the word, and I will be his priest.But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,Ere you can take due orders for a priest:Say you consent and censure well the deed,And I'll provide his executioner,I tender so the safety of my liege.Here is my hand, the deed is worthy doing.And so say I.And I    and now we three have spoke it,It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.Enter a PostGreat lords, from Ireland am I come amain,To signify that rebels there are upAnd put the Englishmen unto the sword:Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime,Before the wound do grow uncurable,For, being green, there is great hope of help.A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!What counsel give you in this weighty cause?That Somerset be sent as regent thither:'Tis meet that lucky ruler be employ'd,Witness the fortune he hath had in France.If York, with all his far-fet policy,Had been the regent there instead of me,He never would have stay'd in France so long.No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done:I rather would have lost my life betimesThan bring a burthen of dishonour homeBy staying there so long till all were lost.Show me one scar character'd on thy skin:Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire,If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with:No more, good York, sweet Somerset, be still:Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,Might happily have proved far worse than his.What, worse than nought? nay, then, a shame take all!And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.The uncivil kerns of Ireland are in armsAnd temper clay with blood of Englishmen:To Ireland will you lead a band of men,Collected choicely, from each county some,And try your hap against the Irishmen?I will, my lord, so please his majesty.Why, our authority is his consent,And what we do establish he confirms:Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.I am content: provide me soldiers, lords,Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.A charge, Lord York, that I will see perform'd.But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.No more of him, for I will deal with himThat henceforth he shall trouble us no more.And so break off, the day is almost spent:Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen daysAt Bristol I expect my soldiers,For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.I'll see it truly done, my Lord of York.Exeunt all but YORKNow, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,And change misdoubt to resolution:Be that thou hopest to be, or what thou artResign to death, it is not worth the enjoying:Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man,And find no harbour in a royal heart.Faster than spring-time showers comes thoughton thought,And not a thought but thinks on dignity.My brain more busy than the labouring spiderWeaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done,To send me packing with an host of men:I fear me you but warm the starved snake,Who, cherish'd in your breasts, will stingyour hearts.'Twas men I lack'd and you will give them me:I take it kindly, and yet be well assuredYou put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,I will stir up in England some black stormShall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell,And this fell tempest shall not cease to rageUntil the golden circuit on my head,Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams,Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.And, for a minister of my intent,I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,John Cade of Ashford,To make commotion, as full well he can,Under the title of John Mortimer.In Ireland have I seen this stubborn CadeOppose himself against a troop of kerns,And fought so long, till that his thighs with dartsWere almost like a sharp-quill'd porpentine,And, in the end being rescued, I have seenHim caper upright like a wild Morisco,Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.Full often, like a shag-hair'd crafty kern,Hath he conversed with the enemy,And undiscover'd come to me againAnd given me notice of their villanies.This devil here shall be my substitute,For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble:By this I shall perceive the commons' mind,How they affect the house and claim of York.Say he be taken, rack'd and tortured,I know no pain they can inflict upon himWill make him say I moved him to those arms.Say that he thrive, as 'tis great like he will,Why, then from Ireland come I with my strengthAnd reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd,For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,And Henry put apart, the next for me.ExitSCENE II. Bury St. Edmund's. A room of state.Enter certain Murderers, hastilyRun to my Lord of Suffolk, let him knowWe have dispatch'd the duke, as he commanded.O that it were to do! What have we done?Didst ever hear a man so penitent?Enter SUFFOLKHere comes my lord.Now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing?Ay, my good lord, he's dead.Why, that's well said. Go, get you to my house,I will reward you for this venturous deed.The king and all the peers are here at hand.Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,According as I gave directions?'Tis, my good lord.Away! be gone.Exeunt MurderersSound trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SOMERSET, with AttendantsGo, call our uncle to our presence straight,Say we intend to try his grace to-day.If he be guilty, as 'tis published.I'll call him presently, my noble lord.ExitLords, take your places, and, I pray you all,Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle GloucesterThan from true evidence of good esteemHe be approved in practise culpable.God forbid any malice should prevail,That faultless may condemn a nobleman!Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!I thank thee, Meg, these words content me much.Re-enter SUFFOLKHow now! why look'st thou pale? why tremblest thou?Where is our uncle? what's the matter, Suffolk?Dead in his bed, my lord, Gloucester is dead.Marry, God forfend!God's secret judgment: I did dream to-nightThe duke was dumb and could not speak a word.KING HENRY VI swoonsHow fares my lord? Help, lords! the king is dead.Rear up his body, wring him by the nose.Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!He doth revive again: madam, be patient.O heavenly God!How fares my gracious lord?Comfort, my sovereign! gracious Henry, comfort!What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me?Came he right now to sing a raven's note,Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers,And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,By crying comfort from a hollow breast,Can chase away the first-conceived sound?Hide not thy poison with such sugar'd words,Lay not thy hands on me, forbear, I say,Their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting.Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyrannySits in grim majesty, to fright the world.Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding:Yet do not go away: come, basilisk,And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight,For in the shade of death I shall find joy,In life but double death, now Gloucester's dead.Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?Although the duke was enemy to him,Yet he most Christian-like laments his death:And for myself, foe as he was to me,Might liquid tears or heart-offending groansOr blood-consuming sighs recall his life,I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,And all to have the noble duke alive.What know I how the world may deem of me?For it is known we were but hollow friends:It may be judged I made the duke away,So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded,And princes' courts be fill'd with my reproach.This get I by his death: ay me, unhappy!To be a queen, and crown'd with infamy!Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?I am no loathsome leper, look on me.What! art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen.Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb?Why, then, dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.Erect his statue and worship it,And make my image but an alehouse sign.Was I for this nigh wreck'd upon the seaAnd twice by awkward wind from England's bankDrove back again unto my native clime?What boded this, but well forewarning windDid seem to say 'Seek not a scorpion's nest,Nor set no footing on this unkind shore'?What did I then, but cursed the gentle gustsAnd he that loosed them forth their brazen caves:And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore,Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rockYet AEolus would not be a murderer,But left that hateful office unto thee:The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,Knowing that thou wouldst have me drown'd on shore,With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness:The splitting rocks cower'd in the sinking sandsAnd would not dash me with their ragged sides,Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,Might in thy palace perish Margaret.As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,I stood upon the hatches in the storm,And when the dusky sky began to robMy earnest-gaping sight of thy land's view,I took a costly jewel from my neck,A heart it was, bound in with diamonds,And threw it towards thy land: the sea received it,And so I wish'd thy body might my heart:And even with this I lost fair England's viewAnd bid mine eyes be packing with my heartAnd call'd them blind and dusky spectacles,For losing ken of Albion's wished coast.How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue,The agent of thy foul inconstancy,To sit and witch me, as Ascanius didWhen he to madding Dido would unfoldHis father's acts commenced in burning Troy!Am I not witch'd like her? or thou not false like him?Ay me, I can no more! die, Margaret!For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.Noise within. Enter WARWICK, SALISBURY, and many CommonsIt is reported, mighty sovereign,That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murder'dBy Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.The commons, like an angry hive of beesThat want their leader, scatter up and downAnd care not who they sting in his revenge.Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny,Until they hear the order of his death.That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true,But how he died God knows, not Henry:Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,And comment then upon his sudden death.That shall I do, my liege. Stay, Salisbury,With the rude multitude till I return.ExitO Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts,My thoughts, that labour to persuade my soulSome violent hands were laid on Humphrey's life!If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,For judgment only doth belong to thee.Fain would I go to chafe his paly lipsWith twenty thousand kisses, and to drainUpon his face an ocean of salt tears,To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling:But all in vain are these mean obsequies,And to survey his dead and earthly image,What were it but to make my sorrow greater?Re-enter WARWICK and others, bearing GLOUCESTER'S body on a bedCome hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.That is to see how deep my grave is made,For with his soul fled all my worldly solace,For seeing him I see my life in death.As surely as my soul intends to liveWith that dread King that took our state upon himTo free us from his father's wrathful curse,I do believe that violent hands were laidUpon the life of this thrice-famed duke.A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?See how the blood is settled in his face.Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale and bloodless,Being all descended to the labouring heart,Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy,Which with the heart there cools and ne'er returnethTo blush and beautify the cheek again.But see, his face is black and full of blood,His eye-balls further out than when he lived,Staring full ghastly like a strangled man,His hair uprear'd, his nostrils stretched with struggling,His hands abroad display'd, as one that grasp'dAnd tugg'd for life and was by strength subdued:Look, on the sheets his hair you see, is sticking,His well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged,Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.It cannot be but he was murder'd here,The least of all these signs were probable.Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death?Myself and Beaufort had him in protection,And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.But both of you were vow'd Duke Humphrey's foes,And you, forsooth, had the good duke to keep:'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend,And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.Then you, belike, suspect these noblemenAs guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding freshAnd sees fast by a butcher with an axe,But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest,But may imagine how the bird was dead,Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?Even so suspicious is this tragedy.Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?Is Beaufort term'd a kite? Where are his talons?I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men,But here's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,That shall be scoured in his rancorous heartThat slanders me with murder's crimson badge.Say, if thou darest, proud Lord of Warwick-shire,That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death.Exeunt CARDINAL, SOMERSET, and othersWhat dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?He dares not calm his contumelious spiritNor cease to be an arrogant controller,Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.Madam, be still, with reverence may I say,For every word you speak in his behalfIs slander to your royal dignity.Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor!If ever lady wrong'd her lord so much,Thy mother took into her blameful bedSome stern untutor'd churl, and noble stockWas graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art,And never of the Nevils' noble race.But that the guilt of murder bucklers theeAnd I should rob the deathsman of his fee,Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,And that my sovereign's presence makes me mild,I would, false murderous coward, on thy kneeMake thee beg pardon for thy passed speech,And say it was thy mother that thou meant'stThat thou thyself was born in bastardy,And after all this fearful homage done,Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!Thou shall be waking well I shed thy blood,If from this presence thou darest go with me.Away even now, or I will drag thee hence:Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with theeAnd do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost.Exeunt SUFFOLK and WARWICKWhat stronger breastplate than a heart untainted!Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,And he but naked, though lock'd up in steelWhose conscience with injustice is corrupted.A noise withinWhat noise is this?Re-enter SUFFOLK and WARWICK, with their weapons drawnWhy, how now, lords! your wrathful weapons drawnHere in our presence! dare you be so bold?Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here?The traitorous Warwick with the men of BurySet all upon me, mighty sovereign.[To the Commons, entering]  Sirs, stand apart,the king shall know your mind.Dread lord, the commons send you word by me,Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,Or banished fair England's territories,They will by violence tear him from your palaceAnd torture him with grievous lingering death.They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died,They say, in him they fear your highness' death,And mere instinct of love and loyalty,Free from a stubborn opposite intent,As being thought to contradict your liking,Makes them thus forward in his banishment.They say, in care of your most royal person,That if your highness should intend to sleepAnd charge that no man should disturb your restIn pain of your dislike or pain of death,Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,Were there a serpent seen, with forked tongue,That slily glided towards your majesty,It were but necessary you were waked,Lest, being suffer'd in that harmful slumber,The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal,And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,That they will guard you, whether you will or no,From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,With whose envenomed and fatal sting,Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,They say, is shamefully bereft of life.[Within]  An answer from the king, myLord of Salisbury!'Tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd hinds,Could send such message to their sovereign:But you, my lord, were glad to be employ'd,To show how quaint an orator you are:But all the honour Salisbury hath wonIs, that he was the lord ambassadorSent from a sort of tinkers to the king.[Within]  An answer from the king, or we will all break in!Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me.I thank them for their tender loving care,And had I not been cited so by them,Yet did I purpose as they do entreat,For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesyMischance unto my state by Suffolk's means:And therefore, by His majesty I swear,Whose far unworthy deputy I am,He shall not breathe infection in this airBut three days longer, on the pain of death.Exit SALISBURYO Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk!No more, I say: if thou dost plead for him,Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.Had I but said, I would have kept my word,But when I swear, it is irrevocable.If, after three days' space, thou here be'st foundOn any ground that I am ruler of,The world shall not be ransom for thy life.Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me,I have great matters to impart to thee.Exeunt all but QUEEN MARGARET and SUFFOLKMischance and sorrow go along with you!Heart's discontent and sour afflictionBe playfellows to keep you company!There's two of you, the devil make a third!And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?A plague upon them! wherefore should I curse them?Would curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan,I would invent as bitter-searching terms,As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear,Deliver'd strongly through my fixed teeth,With full as many signs of deadly hate,As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave:My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint,Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract,Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban:And even now my burthen'd heart would break,Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees!Their chiefest prospect murdering basilisks!Their softest touch as smart as lizards' sting!Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss,And boding screech-owls make the concert full!All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell--Enough, sweet Suffolk, thou torment'st thyself,And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,Or like an overcharged gun, recoil,And turn the force of them upon thyself.You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?Now, by the ground that I am banish'd from,Well could I curse away a winter's night,Though standing naked on a mountain top,Where biting cold would never let grass grow,And think it but a minute spent in sport.O, let me entreat thee cease. Give me thy hand,That I may dew it with my mournful tears,Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place,To wash away my woful monuments.O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,That thou mightst think upon these by the seal,Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee!So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief,'Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by,As one that surfeits thinking on a want.I will repeal thee, or, be well assured,Adventure to be banished myself:And banished I am, if but from thee.Go, speak not to me, even now be gone.O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemn'dEmbrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,Loather a hundred times to part than die.Yet now farewell, and farewell life with thee!Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee.'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence,A wilderness is populous enough,So Suffolk had thy heavenly company:For where thou art, there is the world itself,With every several pleasure in the world,And where thou art not, desolation.I can no more: live thou to joy thy life,Myself no joy in nought but that thou livest.Enter VAUXWither goes Vaux so fast? what news, I prithee?To signify unto his majestyThat Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death,For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air,Blaspheming God and cursing men on earth.Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghostWere by his side, sometime he calls the king,And whispers to his pillow, as to him,The secrets of his overcharged soul,And I am sent to tell his majestyThat even now he cries aloud for him.Go tell this heavy message to the king.Exit VAUXAy me! what is this world! what news are these!But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss,Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,And with the southern clouds contend in tears,Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows?Now get thee hence: the king, thou know'st, is coming,If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.If I depart from thee, I cannot live,And in thy sight to die, what were it elseBut like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?Here could I breathe my soul into the air,As mild and gentle as the cradle-babeDying with mother's dug between its lips:Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad,And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth,So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,Or I should breathe it so into thy body,And then it lived in sweet Elysium.To die by thee were but to die in jest,From thee to die were torture more than death:O, let me stay, befall what may befall!Away! though parting be a fretful corrosive,It is applied to a deathful wound.To France, sweet Suffolk: let me hear from thee,For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe,I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.I go.And take my heart with thee.A jewel, lock'd into the wofull'st caskThat ever did contain a thing of worth.Even as a splitted bark, so sunder weThis way fall I to death.This way for me.Exeunt severallySCENE III. A bedchamber.Enter the KING, SALISBURY, WARWICK, to the CARDINAL in bedHow fares my lord? speak, Beaufort, tothy sovereign.If thou be'st death, I'll give thee England's treasure,Enough to purchase such another island,So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,Where death's approach is seen so terrible!Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.Bring me unto my trial when you will.Died he not in his bed? where should he die?Can I make men live, whether they will or no?O, torture me no more! I will confess.Alive again? then show me where he is:I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.Comb down his hair, look, look! it stands upright,Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.Give me some drink, and bid the apothecaryBring the strong poison that I bought of him.O thou eternal Mover of the heavens.Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!O, beat away the busy meddling fiendThat lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul.And from his bosom purge this black despair!See, how the pangs of death do make him grin!Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!Lord cardinal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.He dies, and makes no sign. O God, forgive him!So bad a death argues a monstrous life.Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close,And let us all to meditation.ExeuntACT IVSCENE I. The coast of Kent.Alarum. Fight at sea. Ordnance goes off. Enter a  Captain, a Master, a Master's-mate, WALTER WHITMORE, and others, with them SUFFOLK, and others, prisonersThe gaudy, blabbing and remorseful dayIs crept into the bosom of the sea,And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jadesThat drag the tragic melancholy night,Who, with their drowsy, slow and flagging wings,Clip dead men's graves and from their misty jawsBreathe foul contagious darkness in the air.Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize,For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,Or with their blood stain this discolour'd shore.Master, this prisoner freely give I thee,And thou that art his mate, make boot of this,The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.What is my ransom, master? let me know.A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.Master's-Mate	And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,And bear the name and port of gentlemen?Cut both the villains' throats, for die you shall:The lives of those which we have lost in fightBe counterpoised with such a petty sum!I'll give it, sir, and therefore spare my life.And so will I and write home for it straight.I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,And therefore to revenge it, shalt thou die,To SUFFOLKAnd so should these, if I might have my will.Be not so rash, take ransom, let him live.Look on my George, I am a gentleman:Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.And so am I, my name is Walter Whitmore.How now! why start'st thou? what, dothdeath affright?Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.A cunning man did calculate my birthAnd told me that by water I should die:Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded,Thy name is Gaultier, being rightly sounded.Gaultier or Walter, which it is, I care not:Never yet did base dishonour blur our name,But with our sword we wiped away the blot,Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge,Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced,And I proclaim'd a coward through the world!Stay, Whitmore, for thy prisoner is a prince,The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags!Ay, but these rags are no part of the duke:Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I?But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry's blood,The honourable blood of Lancaster,Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.Hast thou not kiss'd thy hand and held my stirrup?Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth muleAnd thought thee happy when I shook my head?How often hast thou waited at my cup,Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board.When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?Remember it and let it make thee crest-fall'n,Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride,How in our voiding lobby hast thou stoodAnd duly waited for my coming forth?This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?First let my words stab him, as he hath me.Base slave, thy words are blunt and so art thou.Convey him hence and on our longboat's sideStrike off his head.Thou darest not, for thy own.Yes, Pole.Pole!Pool! Sir Pool! lord!Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirtTroubles the silver spring where England drinks.Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouthFor swallowing the treasure of the realm:Thy lips that kiss'd the queen shall sweep the ground,And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphrey's death,Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain,Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again:And wedded be thou to the hags of hell,For daring to affy a mighty lordUnto the daughter of a worthless king,Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.By devilish policy art thou grown great,And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorgedWith gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France,The false revolting Normans thorough theeDisdain to call us lord, and PicardyHath slain their governors, surprised our forts,And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all,Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,As hating thee, are rising up in arms:And now the house of York, thrust from the crownBy shameful murder of a guiltless kingAnd lofty proud encroaching tyranny,Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful coloursAdvance our half-faced sun, striving to shine,Under the which is writ 'Invitis nubibus.'The commons here in Kent are up in arms:And, to conclude, reproach and beggaryIs crept into the palace of our king.And all by thee. Away! convey him hence.O that I were a god, to shoot forth thunderUpon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!Small things make base men proud: this villain here,Being captain of a pinnace, threatens moreThan Bargulus the strong Illyrian pirate.Drones suck not eagles' blood but rob beehives:It is impossible that I should dieBy such a lowly vassal as thyself.Thy words move rage and not remorse in me:I go of message from the queen to France,I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.Walter,--Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.Gelidus timor occupat artus it is thee I fear.Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.What, are ye daunted now? now will ye stoop?My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough,Used to command, untaught to plead for favour.Far be it we should honour such as theseWith humble suit: no, rather let my headStoop to the block than these knees bow to anySave to the God of heaven and to my king,And sooner dance upon a bloody poleThan stand uncover'd to the vulgar groom.True nobility is exempt from fear:More can I bear than you dare execute.Hale him away, and let him talk no more.Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can,That this my death may never be forgot!Great men oft die by vile bezonians:A Roman sworder and banditto slaveMurder'd sweet Tully, Brutus' bastard handStabb'd Julius Caesar, savage islandersPompey the Great, and Suffolk dies by pirates.Exeunt Whitmore and others with SuffolkAnd as for these whose ransom we have set,It is our pleasure one of them depart,Therefore come you with us and let him go.Exeunt all but the First GentlemanRe-enter WHITMORE with SUFFOLK's bodyThere let his head and lifeless body lie,Until the queen his mistress bury it.ExitO barbarous and bloody spectacle!His body will I bear unto the king:If he revenge it not, yet will his friends,So will the queen, that living held him dear.Exit with the bodySCENE II. Blackheath.Enter GEORGE BEVIS and JOHN HOLLANDCome, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath,they have been up these two days.They have the more need to sleep now, then.I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dressthe commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say itwas never merry world in England since gentlemen came up.O miserable age! virtue is not regarded in handicrafts-men.The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.Nay, more, the king's council are no good workmen.True, and yet it is said, labour in thy vocation,which is as much to say as, let the magistrates belabouring men, and therefore should we bemagistrates.Thou hast hit it, for there's no better sign of abrave mind than a hard hand.I see them! I see them! there's Best's son, thetanner of Wingham,--He shall have the skin of our enemies, to makedog's-leather of.And Dick the Butcher,--